sustainability
Article
3D Surveying of Underground Built Heritage: Opportunities
and Challenges of Mobile Technologies
Francesco Di Stefano1,*
, Alessandro Torresani2,3
, Elisa M. Farella2
, Roberto Pierdicca1
, Fabio Menna2
and Fabio Remondino2
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Di Stefano, F.; Torresani, A.;
Farella, E.M.; Pierdicca, R.; Menna, F.;
Remondino, F. 3D Surveying of
Underground Built Heritage:
Opportunities and Challenges of
Mobile Technologies. Sustainability
2021 ,13, 13289. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su132313289
Academic Editor: Mariateresa Lettieri
Received: 18 October 2021
Accepted: 25 November 2021
Published: 30 November 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile, Edile e Architettura, Universit àPolitecnica delle Marche,
Via Brecce Bianche, 12, 60131 Ancona, Italy; r.pierdicca@univpm.it
23D Optical Metrology (3DOM) Unit, Bruno Kessler Foundation (FBK), Via Sommarive, 18, 38123 Trento, Italy;
atorresani@fbk.eu (A.T.); elifarella@fbk.eu (E.M.F.); fmenna@fbk.eu (F.M.); remondino@fbk.eu (F.R.)
3Dipartimento di Ingegneria e Scienza dell’Informazione (DISI), Universit ádegli Studi di Trento,
Via Sommarive, 9, 38123 Trento, Italy
*Correspondence: f.distefano@pm.univpm.it
Abstract: Among the existing Cultural Heritage settings, Underground Built Heritage (UBH) repre-
sents a peculiar case. The scarce or lack of knowledge and documentation of these spaces frequently
limits their proper management, exploitation, and valorization. When mapping these environments
for documentation purposes, the primary need is to achieve a complete, reliable, and adequate repre-
sentation of the built spaces and their geometry. Terrestrial laser scanners were widely employed
for this task, although the procedure is generally time-consuming and often lacks color information.
Mobile Mapping Systems (MMSs) are nowadays fascinating and promising technologies for map-
ping underground structures, speeding up acquisition times. In this paper, mapping experiences
(with two commercial tools and an in-house prototype) in UBH settings are presented, testing the
different handheld mobile solutions to guarantee an accurate and reliable 3D digitization. Tests
were performed in the selected case study of Camerano Caves (Italy), characterized by volumetric
complexity, poor lighting conditions, and difﬁcult accessibility. The aim of this research activity is not
only to show the differences in the technological instruments used for 3D surveying, but rather to
argue over the pros and cons of the systems, providing the community with best practices and rules
for 3D data collection with handheld mobile systems. The experiments deliver promising results
when compared with TLS data.
Keywords: underground built heritage; 3D surveying; mobile mapping; laser scanning; photogrammetry
1. Introduction
For almost two decades, reality-based 3D digitization and modelling have been ap-
plied in many ﬁelds, from industries to entertainment and medicine. The 3D digitization
of Cultural Heritage (CH) is also considered a common practice for documentation, conser-
vation, preservation, valorization, and visualization purposes [ 1–3]. Moreover, 3D data
are an efﬁcient medium for tourist attractions [ 4,5], for digital archiving and dissemination
of artefacts and monuments to future generations [ 6–8], or for allowing VR/AR (Virtual
Reality/Augmented Reality) access with mobile devices [9–14].
Currently, there is a signiﬁcant variety of 3D acquisition methodologies, but various 3D
digitization activities are being performed with results inferior to those initially expected,
or often without a clear quality check. This is because no 3D data collection technique can
be correctly used without understanding its accuracy potential, limitations, and behavior
under certain conditions. A correct approach to decide which technique is better suited for
a particular situation should be followed, whereas a correct methodology to predict and
compute the quality of the ﬁnal 3D results must also be applied.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132313289 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 2 of 18
Built and natural Cultural Heritage is commonly digitized using image-based and
range-based techniques, where they are often integrated in order to exploit the intrinsic
advantages of each one and overcome possible problems [ 15–18]. If image and range data
are employed for the 3D digitization of heritage sites or objects, the term reality-based 3D
surveying and modelling is used to distinguish from computer graphics approaches where
ﬁeld measurements are typically not performed [19].
Among the existing CH settings, the Underground Built Heritage (UBH) represents
a peculiar case. The scarce or lack of knowledge and documentation of these spaces
frequently limits their full exploitation and valorization. The complete mapping of this
hidden heritage is the ﬁrst step for bridging these knowledge gaps, providing the decision-
makers with a reliable “picture” of the underground settings. Along with the geological
investigations, the clear and complete representation of these spaces is crucial for investing
in their conservation or planning a new urban function able to meet the space demand of
the modern cities [20–22].
Nevertheless, mapping the UBH is frequently an arduous task, conditioned by com-
plex environmental and constructive factors which typify these scenarios, like poor il-
lumination, narrow passages, and articulated paths. Moreover, the recurring relevant
dimensions of these underground structures entail acquiring a considerable amount of
3D information that is difﬁcult to manage and share among the experts involved in the
decision-making process [23].
When mapping these environments for documentation purposes, the primary need is
to achieve a complete, correct, and adequate representation of the built spaces and their
geometry. For a long time, terrestrial laser scanners (TLS) have been widely employed for
this task (Section 2.1), although the procedure is generally time-consuming. In this case,
the registration of multiple scans requires numerous stations, even only to avoid partially
occluded areas, thus producing a huge amount of unmanageable data.
Besides, further colorimetric information is often required for more in-depth analyses
of the masonries and the more faithful restitution of the structures. Image-based techniques
can support this task, although they would demand a notable effort in large and poorly
illuminated environments.
When selecting the suitable technology for UBH documentation projects, additional
needs have to be considered. Firstly, in large and complex underground contexts, the
chosen solution should speed up the acquisition phase and assure the rapid mapping of
the environments. Moreover, the selected technology should result as:
 agile: cumbersome instruments should be avoided in underground contexts with
frequent setbacks and scarce accessibility;
 cost-effective: the best results should be achieved with reasonable costs;
 easy to use: these technologies are also often managed by non-expert staff;
 affordable: CH generally suffers a generalized lack of resources hence, low-cost
solutions are preferable.
For these reasons, handheld Mobile Mapping Systems (MMSs) are nowadays fasci-
nating and promising technologies for mapping underground structures, speeding up the
acquisition times and returning colorimetric information in many cases.
The particular conﬁguration of these extended underground caves, characterized by
poor and variable illumination, scarce accessibility, and the complex succession of corridors,
narrow passages, and wider rooms makes this site particularly suitable for testing their
performance in such challenging scenarios. All the considered systems are based on
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) technologies (Section 2.2), adopting
different strategies (LiDAR and Visual) for tracking the device and mapping the scene.
The data collected were compared with a reference survey performed with Terrestrial
Laser Scanner (TLS), used as the ground truth in the proposed evaluations. The possibility
to compare different “state of the art” portable mobile mapping systems sheds light on
the opportunity offered by fast mapping systems, and opens the debate over new ways to
simplify the UBH documentation and conservation process.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 3 of 18
In this paper, we present three mapping experiences in UBH settings (the Camerano
Caves, Italy—Section 3.1), testing three different handheld mobile solutions (Section 3.2)
in order to guarantee an accurate and detailed 3D documentation of the UBH site. The
innovative aspects presented in the article include:
1. experiments performed in a real large scenario using a speciﬁc experimental protocol,
considering both commercial off-the-shelf and prototype solutions as well as visual
and LiDAR methods;
2. an accuracy evaluation performed with the aid of reference ground truth data (based
on TLS acquisitions), which allowed discussion of the costs/beneﬁts to be argued in a
more reliable way, besides providing quantitative results;
3. results suitable for deﬁning best practices for exploiting mobile systems in UBH
settings, deﬁned considering the different factors making such scenarios challenging.
This paper stems from the activities of the Underground4Value (U4V) COST Ac-
tion (CA18110) [ 24], which aims at providing adequate cultural, scientiﬁc, and technical
knowledge of the Underground Built Heritage (UBH) concerning different aspects (i.e.,
archaeology, geotechnics, history, urban planning, architecture, cultural anthropology,
economics, tourism, sustainable development), in a multi-disciplinary context.
With respect to the special issue in the Sustainability journal “Going Underground.
Making Heritage Sustainable”, the article addresses the accurate 3D documentation of a
protected underground heritage site, presenting innovative handheld mobile mapping
tools, lessons learned, and research directions for the preservation and valorization of UBH.
2. Related Works
2.1. 3D Digitization of Underground Built Heritage
Underground environments are primarily the result of natural processes and/or
human actions. Over time, these structures have been often exploited with several func-
tions [ 25–27]. Among the built and natural cavities, some are considered and recognized
as cultural heritage to preserve and valorize, for their particular historical value or the
structure architectural quality. The documentation of these environments is not a recent
activity, although traditional procedures and instruments are nowadays overcome. The
more efﬁcient reality-based 3D surveying technologies have replaced the old clinome-
ters and compasses used for distance and angular measurements, as well as more recent
tacheometric methods [28].
Among these 3D mapping instruments, the use of terrestrial laser scanners (TLS) has
been broadly explored, especially for the high geometric resolution also achievable in
underground environments [29–32].
Photogrammetric approaches are also presented in the literature, although their use is
often limited compared to TLS data [ 33,34]. Further works have shown the potential of pho-
togrammetry to document and deeply inspect cavities [ 35], but the applications are often
focused on small underground areas. Despite both technique capability to achieve highly
detailed 3D reconstructions, they require considerable effort when the mapping interests ex-
tended subterranean surfaces. In these cases, a relevant number of scan stations or images
are needed for preventing occlusions and missing 3D data. This can also easily result in a
vast and unmanageable quantity of information to be processed. Moreover, image-based
techniques are frequently penalized by poor or nonuniform lighting conditions, whereas
TLS is scarcely usable in narrow spaces or areas with limited accessibility.
For these reasons, the research community has recently focused on testing more agile
and faster solutions for accurately and entirely documenting these structures with less
effort [ 36]. In the last years, some portable Mobile Mapping Systems (MMS) [ 35] have
been tested in underground environments [ 2,37–42], with promising results in speeding up
documentation in these particular contexts.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 4 of 18
2.2. SLAM and Mobile Technologies
In its most generic deﬁnition, a Mobile Mapping System (MMS) is a mobile survey
platform used to acquire data, optionally geo-referenced, for 3D reconstruction purposes.
The development of these systems began in the late 1980s and, although the ﬁrst examples
were mainly vehicle-mounted [ 43], many human-carriable devices have been proposed
so far [ 35]. Compared to static/tripod-mounted survey methods, MSSs can drastically
reduce the working times generally reaching, when used within the supported range and
operational speeds [ 44], a complete object coverage with an accuracy of a few centimeters.
The classical equipment of a MMS consists of three main hardware components: mapping
sensors, navigation/positioning sensors, and a time-referencing unit [ 45]. Mapping sensors
collect environmental information, typically in the form of LiDAR point clouds and/or
RGB/-D images. Navigation/positioning sensors provide positional information of the
device exploiting the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) receivers and/or Inertial
Measurements Unit (IMU) sensors. The time-referencing unit synchronizes the data coming
from all the sensors and eventually performs onboard computations and/or optimizations.
In GNSS-denied environments, like underground, satellite positioning is not avail-
able, and the tracking of the platform trajectory is often performed with Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) algorithms [ 46–48]. The goal of these algorithms is
to estimate, solely from onboard sensor data and in real-time, a map of the surrounding
environment, while, at the same time, locating the mobile platform within it. Depending on
the available sensors, SLAM algorithms commonly work on laser scanners (LiDAR SLAM,
e.g., [ 49]) and/or RGB/-D (Visual SLAM, e.g., [ 50,51]) images, also taking advance of IMU
measurements when available. Conceptually, a SLAM algorithm can be decomposed into a
frontend and a backend [ 48]. The former abstracts sensor data into models that are used
to (i) perform short- and long-term (loop closures) data association between consecutive
sensor measurements, and (ii) provide an approximate guess of the device and landmark
positions. The latter tries to reduce the accumulated errors of the frontend via least-square
optimizations on the trajectory graph. The performance of SLAM algorithms is strongly
linked to the scene (presence of texture and light for Visual SLAM and stable and distinctive
geometric features for LiDAR SLAM) and the followed trajectory (distance to the object,
type of movements, moving speed).
3. Materials and Methods
3.1. Case Study
One of the living-labs stemmed from the activities of the U4V COST Action is in
central Italy, where there are many other hypogea with different functions: water reservoir,
military-strategic, food storage, cultural or religious function, and mines or quarries.
Among them, the city of Camerano (Marche region, Italy) represents a local heritage and a
landmark for its network of connected built underground spaces.
The complex environment of the Camerano Caves is a set of halls and tunnels located
below the city center and extends for a total length of 3 km (Figure 1, Figure 2). This
“underground city” has a totally anthropogenic origin, extending under almost all the
historical buildings of the city centre. The full extension of the hypogeum is still a subject
of interest and research today [ 52–54]: there are also other tunnels and caves far from
the main body with similar characteristics. The ﬁrst reliable records date back to 1327.
It seems that their origins are even related to the pre-historical era, but the presence of
new decorative patterns suggests that caves and tunnels were used since the XIX century
by gentry families for reunions and rituals. In 1944, the hypogeum was used as a shelter
from bombardments of World War II by about 2000 people [ 55,56]. The local community’s
self-initiative and the determination and far-sightedness of the local authority allowed to
differentiate the local tourism offer, leading to success in terms of tourism attractiveness,
with more than 25,000 visitors per year.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 5 of 18
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 5 of 19 
 
decorative patterns suggests that caves and tu nnels were used since the XIX century by 
gentry families for reunions and rituals. In 1944, the hypogeum was used as a shelter from 
bombardments of World War II by about 2000 people [55,56]. The local community’s self-
initiative and the determination and far-sightedness of the local authority allowed to 
differentiate the local tourism offer, leading to  success in terms of tourism attractiveness, 
with more than 25,000 visitors per year. 
Based on physical and structural aspects of this underground environment, which 
are important to highlight for the survey, the floor plan is labyrinthine, and the spaces are 
distributed on different levels in depth. Over time, most of the various underground 
spaces have been joined together, creating co nnecting corridors and staircases that define 
a continuous path. The rooms also vary in size and volume, with an alternation of 
rectilinear and non-rectilinear passages of varying widths, sometimes with niches 
opening at the sides, and leading into larger polygonal or circular spaces. The variability 
of these spaces can also be seen in the un derground pedestrian route, which presents 
numerous changes of direction. The intrados of these underground rooms also vary, such as barrel-vaulted passageways and niches and domed halls. The interi or surfaces of these 
caves are made of friable material, such as sandstone, so they are rough and not smooth. 
The underground complex of the caves is artificially illuminated by small lamps installed along the footpath. The light intensity is subd ued, thus presenting some shadowy spaces.  
 
Figure 1. Overview of the city center of Camerano (Ita ly) with overlaid the map of the underground 
caves (ca 3 km long). 
 
Figure 2. Vertical section of the city center of Camerano (Italy) with the underground caves. 
Figure 1. Overview of the city center of Camerano (Italy) with overlaid the map of the underground
caves (ca 3 km long).
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 5 of 19 
 
decorative patterns suggests that caves and tu nnels were used since the XIX century by 
gentry families for reunions and rituals. In 1944, the hypogeum was used as a shelter from 
bombardments of World War II by about 2000 people [55,56]. The local community’s self-
initiative and the determination and far-sightedness of the local authority allowed to 
differentiate the local tourism offer, leading to  success in terms of tourism attractiveness, 
with more than 25,000 visitors per year. 
Based on physical and structural aspects of this underground environment, which 
are important to highlight for the survey, the floor plan is labyrinthine, and the spaces are 
distributed on different levels in depth. Over time, most of the various underground 
spaces have been joined together, creating co nnecting corridors and staircases that define 
a continuous path. The rooms also vary in size and volume, with an alternation of 
rectilinear and non-rectilinear passages of varying widths, sometimes with niches 
opening at the sides, and leading into larger polygonal or circular spaces. The variability 
of these spaces can also be seen in the un derground pedestrian route, which presents 
numerous changes of direction. The intrados of these underground rooms also vary, such as barrel-vaulted passageways and niches and domed halls. The interi or surfaces of these 
caves are made of friable material, such as sandstone, so they are rough and not smooth. 
The underground complex of the caves is artificially illuminated by small lamps installed along the footpath. The light intensity is subd ued, thus presenting some shadowy spaces.  
 
Figure 1. Overview of the city center of Camerano (Ita ly) with overlaid the map of the underground 
caves (ca 3 km long). 
 
Figure 2. Vertical section of the city center of Camerano (Italy) with the underground caves. 
Figure 2. Vertical section of the city center of Camerano (Italy) with the underground caves.
Based on physical and structural aspects of this underground environment, which
are important to highlight for the survey, the ﬂoor plan is labyrinthine, and the spaces
are distributed on different levels in depth. Over time, most of the various underground
spaces have been joined together, creating connecting corridors and staircases that deﬁne a
continuous path. The rooms also vary in size and volume, with an alternation of rectilinear
and non-rectilinear passages of varying widths, sometimes with niches opening at the
sides, and leading into larger polygonal or circular spaces. The variability of these spaces
can also be seen in the underground pedestrian route, which presents numerous changes
of direction. The intrados of these underground rooms also vary, such as barrel-vaulted
passageways and niches and domed halls. The interior surfaces of these caves are made of
friable material, such as sandstone, so they are rough and not smooth. The underground
complex of the caves is artiﬁcially illuminated by small lamps installed along the footpath.
The light intensity is subdued, thus presenting some shadowy spaces.
3.2. Tested Mobile Mapping Systems
In 2019, at the request of the municipality of Camerano, a survey of the caves was car-
ried out with the Terrestrial Laser Scanner (TLS) Z + F Imager 5010 for restoration purposes
and monitoring of some phenomena of damage and degradation. The survey consisted of
317 scans co-registered using markers of known coordinates in a local geodetic network.
The number of points composing the whole dataset is almost 11 mln. An optimized 3D
mesh model at 2 cm spatial resolution was exploited as ground truth to validate the quality
of the point clouds generated by the tested MMSs, described in the following:
 KAARTA Stencil 2–16 [ 57] is a commercial mobile scanner. It mounts a LiDAR (Velo-
dyne VLP-16), a low-resolution color camera, a low-cost MEMS (Micro Electro Mechan-
ical Systems) IMU, and a computer for real-time processing. VLP-16 has a 360ﬁeld of
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 6 of 18
view with a 30azimuthal opening with a band of 16 scan lines. The data acquisition
is based on setting the conﬁguration parameters that vary for the type of environment
detected, mainly between outdoor and indoor. These parameters include the voxelSize ,
namely the resolution of the point cloud in the map ﬁle, cornerVoxelSize ,surfVoxelSize ,
sorroundVoxelSize , which indicate the resolution of the point cloud for scan matching
and display, and blindRadius , that is the minimum distance of the points to be used
for the mapping. This laser device is versatile and can be mounted on any mobile
platform. For underground environments, it can be supported by a hand-held pole.
The progress of the scanning can be monitored in real-time via an external monitor
attached with a USB cable.
 GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon [ 58] is a commercial and hand-held mobile scanner, mounting
the same LiDAR and IMU systems of KAARTA Stencil 2–16. As an accessory, the
ZEB Cam is a color camera for GeoSLAM’s ZEB Horizon, embedding a Hawkeye
Fireﬂy 8SE action video camera. The image data collected by the camera can be
viewed alongside the 3D point cloud created by the ZEB Horizon and used to extract
contextual information. The process of collecting data using the Zeb Horizon scanning
system is highly automated. The raw laser data is co-registered into a consistent 3D
point cloud by the internal SLAM algorithm, assuming a collaborative scene with
distinctive geometric features. While KAARTA Stencil 2–16 is able to process data
in real-time, the data acquired by GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon are processed using the
GeoSLAM Hub processing software. Therefore, an additional accessory of GeoSLAM
devices in a data logger to save the acquired data.
 GuPho [ 59] is a research prototype developed by the 3DOM unit of FBK. Unlike the
other two portable MMSs, GuPho is a pure vision device. The 3D reconstruction
is therefore obtained from the acquired images with photogrammetry and dense
image matching. The system is composed of two synchronized stereo cameras, an
embedded pc (Raspberry Pi 4), a smartphone, a battery pack and an illuminator.
GuPho integrates a custom Visual SLAM algorithm based on OPEN-V-SLAM [ 60]
to keep track of the acquisition trajectory, ﬁlter out redundant images, display the
sparse 3D reconstruction of the area in real-time, and provide real-time feedback
and warnings on the image acquisition, such as motion-blur and achieved Ground
Sample Distance (GSD). The ﬁnal dense 3D reconstruction is obtained after the survey,
in post-processing, leveraging the image orientations estimated in real-time by the
Visual SLAM algorithm to speed up the process. Given the narrow and complex
structure of the Camerano caves, the system was conﬁgured with ﬁsheye lenses (focal
length of 1.85 mm and ﬁeld of view of almost 180) to maximize the view coverage of
the images.
3.3. Data Acquisition and Processing
The considered test area of the caves is shown in Figure 3. It is composed of several
rooms characterized by different geometries, shapes, and illumination, and connected by
both long “tunnel-like” sections and narrow passages. The whole area was acquired within
a single SLAM session, except for GuPho where the “Camerone” part (yellow trajectory in
Figure 3c) was surveyed, due to a temporary access interdiction, with an additional session.
The acquisition trajectories of the three systems are shown in Figure 3, while high-level
metrics of the acquisition are collected in Table 1. The MMSs were conﬁgured with the
default parameters (only the KAARTA Stencil foresees the indoor preset).
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 7 of 18
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 7 of 19 
 
both long “tunnel-like” sections and narrow passages. The whole area was acquired 
within a single SLAM session, except for GuPho where the “Camerone” part (yellow 
trajectory in Figure 3c) was surveyed, due to  a temporary access interdiction, with an 
additional session. The acquisition trajectories  of the three systems are shown in Figure 3, 
while high-level metrics of the acquisition are collected in Table 1. The MMSs were 
configured with the default parameters (onl y the KAARTA Stencil foresees the indoor 
preset). 
 
 
Figure 3. The acquisition trajectories of the thr ee MMSs tested in the Camerano caves: ( a) KAARTA 
Stencil 2 –16; (b) GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon; ( c) GuPho. 
At the end of the acquisition, the estima ted trajectories and point clouds were 
optimized offline with the software provided by the vendors of the MMSs. For the post-
processing and registration of point clouds  obtained by KAARTA, already processed in 
real-time during the acquisition phase, the software Cloud Compare was used. The output 
files downloaded from the GeoSLAM data logger were processed using the GeoSLAM 
Figure 3. The acquisition trajectories of the three MMSs tested in the Camerano caves: ( a) KAARTA
Stencil 2–16; ( b) GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon; ( c) GuPho.
At the end of the acquisition, the estimated trajectories and point clouds were op-
timized ofﬂine with the software provided by the vendors of the MMSs. For the post-
processing and registration of point clouds obtained by KAARTA, already processed in
real-time during the acquisition phase, the software Cloud Compare was used. The output
ﬁles downloaded from the GeoSLAM data logger were processed using the GeoSLAM Hub
software. For GuPho, the acquired images and their corresponding 6DOF orientation were
optimized in Agisoft Metashape before performing dense image-matching with the same
software. The total amount of processing time required for each device is shown in Table 1.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 8 of 18
Table 1. Acquisition parameters and speciﬁcations of the used MMSs with the relative processing time and hardware.
KAARTA
Stencil 2–16GeoSLAM
Zeb HorizonGuPho
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 8 of 19 
 
same software. The total amount of processing time required for each device is shown in 
Table 1. 
Table 1. Acquisition parameters and specifications of the used MMSs with the relative processing time and hardware. 
 KAARTA  
Stencil 2–16 GeoSLAM 
Zeb Horizon GuPho 
 
   
Acquisition 
parameters 
configuration Scan registration: 
Default parameters Target GSD set to 5 mm 
Automatic exposure time voxelSize: 0.1 m 
blindRadius: 1 m 
 
Laser mapping: cornerVoxelSize: 0.1 m surfVoxelSize: 0.2 m surroundVoxelSize: 0.3 m 
Acquisition time ~8 min ~12 min Trajectory 1: ~30 min Trajectory 
2: ~10 min 
Trajectory leght ~295 m ~380 m Trajectory 1: 290 m 
Trajectory 2: ~114 m 
Average speed ~0.612 m/s ~0.528 m/s Trajectory 1: ~0.151 m/s  
Trajectory 2: ~0.185 m/s 
Processing time Real-time processing 
(processor embedded) ~ 25 min  
(GeoSLAM Hub) Trajectory 1: 
Bundle adjustement 
optimization: ~177 min 
Dense matching: ~438 min  Trajectory 2:  Bundle adjustement 
optimization: ~7 min 
Dense matching: ~80 min 
 
Hardware Intel NUC 7i7 
Quad Core i7 8700K, Intel Core ™ 
32 GB RAM i7 6800K, Nvidia 1070 8GB 24 
GB RAM 
4. Results 
The results of the mapping activity in th e Camerano caves are hereafter presented. 
The dense point clouds obtained with the thre e mobile systems (Section 3.2) were used 
for evaluating their mapping capability in different underground spaces, using the TLS data (point cloud and generated mesh) as grou nd truth. As presented in Section 4.1, a 
different acquisition protocol was followed du ring the surveying campaign, according to 
the characteristics of each technology and th e area to map. Acquired datasets were 
primarily co-registered with the ground-truth TLS point cloud, using the Iterative Closest 
Point (ICP) algorithm for finding the transformation between the reference and source 
point clouds. Therefore, for each of the su b-blocks, the Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and the 
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 8 of 19 
 
same software. The total amount of processing time required for each device is shown in 
Table 1. 
Table 1. Acquisition parameters and specifications of the used MMSs with the relative processing time and hardware. 
 KAARTA  
Stencil 2–16 GeoSLAM 
Zeb Horizon GuPho 
 
   
Acquisition 
parameters 
configuration Scan registration: 
Default parameters Target GSD set to 5 mm 
Automatic exposure time voxelSize: 0.1 m 
blindRadius: 1 m 
 
Laser mapping: cornerVoxelSize: 0.1 m surfVoxelSize: 0.2 m surroundVoxelSize: 0.3 m 
Acquisition time ~8 min ~12 min Trajectory 1: ~30 min Trajectory 
2: ~10 min 
Trajectory leght ~295 m ~380 m Trajectory 1: 290 m 
Trajectory 2: ~114 m 
Average speed ~0.612 m/s ~0.528 m/s Trajectory 1: ~0.151 m/s  
Trajectory 2: ~0.185 m/s 
Processing time Real-time processing 
(processor embedded) ~ 25 min  
(GeoSLAM Hub) Trajectory 1: 
Bundle adjustement 
optimization: ~177 min 
Dense matching: ~438 min  Trajectory 2:  Bundle adjustement 
optimization: ~7 min 
Dense matching: ~80 min 
 
Hardware Intel NUC 7i7 
Quad Core i7 8700K, Intel Core ™ 
32 GB RAM i7 6800K, Nvidia 1070 8GB 24 
GB RAM 
4. Results 
The results of the mapping activity in th e Camerano caves are hereafter presented. 
The dense point clouds obtained with the thre e mobile systems (Section 3.2) were used 
for evaluating their mapping capability in different underground spaces, using the TLS data (point cloud and generated mesh) as grou nd truth. As presented in Section 4.1, a 
different acquisition protocol was followed du ring the surveying campaign, according to 
the characteristics of each technology and th e area to map. Acquired datasets were 
primarily co-registered with the ground-truth TLS point cloud, using the Iterative Closest 
Point (ICP) algorithm for finding the transformation between the reference and source 
point clouds. Therefore, for each of the su b-blocks, the Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and the 
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 8 of 19 
 
same software. The total amount of processing time required for each device is shown in 
Table 1. 
Table 1. Acquisition parameters and specifications of the used MMSs with the relative processing time and hardware. 
 KAARTA  
Stencil 2–16 GeoSLAM 
Zeb Horizon GuPho 
 
   
Acquisition 
parameters 
configuration Scan registration: 
Default parameters Target GSD set to 5 mm 
Automatic exposure time voxelSize: 0.1 m 
blindRadius: 1 m 
 
Laser mapping: cornerVoxelSize: 0.1 m surfVoxelSize: 0.2 m surroundVoxelSize: 0.3 m 
Acquisition time ~8 min ~12 min Trajectory 1: ~30 min Trajectory 
2: ~10 min 
Trajectory leght ~295 m ~380 m Trajectory 1: 290 m 
Trajectory 2: ~114 m 
Average speed ~0.612 m/s ~0.528 m/s Trajectory 1: ~0.151 m/s  
Trajectory 2: ~0.185 m/s 
Processing time Real-time processing 
(processor embedded) ~ 25 min  
(GeoSLAM Hub) Trajectory 1: 
Bundle adjustement 
optimization: ~177 min 
Dense matching: ~438 min  Trajectory 2:  Bundle adjustement 
optimization: ~7 min 
Dense matching: ~80 min 
 
Hardware Intel NUC 7i7 
Quad Core i7 8700K, Intel Core ™ 
32 GB RAM i7 6800K, Nvidia 1070 8GB 24 
GB RAM 
4. Results 
The results of the mapping activity in th e Camerano caves are hereafter presented. 
The dense point clouds obtained with the thre e mobile systems (Section 3.2) were used 
for evaluating their mapping capability in different underground spaces, using the TLS data (point cloud and generated mesh) as grou nd truth. As presented in Section 4.1, a 
different acquisition protocol was followed du ring the surveying campaign, according to 
the characteristics of each technology and th e area to map. Acquired datasets were 
primarily co-registered with the ground-truth TLS point cloud, using the Iterative Closest 
Point (ICP) algorithm for finding the transformation between the reference and source 
point clouds. Therefore, for each of the su b-blocks, the Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and the 
Acquisition parameters
conﬁgurationScan registration:
Default parametersTarget GSD set to 5 mm
Automatic exposure timevoxelSize: 0.1 m
blindRadius: 1 m
Laser mapping:
cornerVoxelSize: 0.1 m
surfVoxelSize: 0.2 m
surroundVoxelSize: 0.3 m
Acquisition time ~8 min ~12 minTrajectory 1: ~30 min
Trajectory 2: ~10 min
Trajectory leght ~295 m ~380 mTrajectory 1: 290 m
Trajectory 2: ~114 m
Average speed ~0.612 m/s ~0.528 m/sTrajectory 1: ~0.151 m/s
Trajectory 2: ~0.185 m/s
Processing timeReal-time processing
(processor embedded)~ 25 min
(GeoSLAM Hub)Trajectory 1:
Bundle adjustement
optimization: ~177 min
Dense matching: ~438 min
Trajectory 2:
Bundle adjustement
optimization: ~7 min
Dense matching: ~80 min
HardwareIntel NUC 7i7
Quad Corei7 8700K, Intel Core ™
32 GB RAMi7 6800K, Nvidia 1070 8GB
24 GB RAM
4. Results
The results of the mapping activity in the Camerano caves are hereafter presented.
The dense point clouds obtained with the three mobile systems (Section 3.2) were used
for evaluating their mapping capability in different underground spaces, using the TLS
data (point cloud and generated mesh) as ground truth. As presented in Section 4.1, a
different acquisition protocol was followed during the surveying campaign, according
to the characteristics of each technology and the area to map. Acquired datasets were
primarily co-registered with the ground-truth TLS point cloud, using the Iterative Closest
Point (ICP) algorithm for ﬁnding the transformation between the reference and source
point clouds. Therefore, for each of the sub-blocks, the Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and the
Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) distances were computed to evaluate each solution’s behaviour
in different underground environments. For the evaluation, some metrics and/or visual
analyses are proposed, considering sub-blocks with similar environmental features of the
“Corraducci” cave (Figure 4), and in particular:
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 9 of 18
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 9 of 19 
 
Point (ICP) algorithm for finding the transf ormation between the reference and source 
point clouds. Therefore, for each of the su b-blocks, the Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and the 
Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) distances were computed to evaluate each solution’s behaviour in 
different underground environments. For the evaluation, some metrics and/or visual 
analyses are proposed, considering sub-blocks with similar environmental features of the 
“Corraducci” cave (Figure 4), and in particular: 
 
Figure 4. Selected sub-blocks used for C2C comparison  between the point clouds obtained from 
different SLAM technolo gies and TLS survey. 
1. The “Camerone” cave: one quite large and some smaller rooms connected through 
narrow passages (Figure 5, Table 2); 
(a) ( b) 
Figure 5. Sub-block 1: the “Camerone” cave ( a). An exploded view of the dense point cloud obtained, in this case, with the 
GuPho device ( b). 
Table 2. Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) [m] results for the sub-block 1. 
1. Camerone Cave  C2C  C2M  
 Mean  st. dev.  Mean  st. dev. 
KAARTA Stencil 2 –16 0.0715 0.1046 −0.0121 0.1289 
GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon 0.0085 0.0147 −0.0052 0.0149 
GuPho 0.0099 0.0196 0.0013 0.0245 
Figure 4. Selected sub-blocks used for C2C comparison between the point clouds obtained from different SLAM technologies
and TLS survey.
1. The “Camerone” cave: one quite large and some smaller rooms connected through
narrow passages (Figure 5, Table 2);
Sustainability  2021,  13, 13289 9 of 19 
Point (ICP) algorithm for finding the transf ormation between the reference and source 
point clouds. Therefore, for each of the su b-blocks, the Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and the 
Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) distances were computed to evaluate each solution’s behaviour in 
different underground environments. For the evaluation, some metrics and/or visual 
analyses are proposed, considering sub-blocks with similar environmental features of the 
“Corraducci” cave (Figure 4), and in particular: 
Figure 4. Selected sub-blocks used for C2C comparison  between the point clouds obtained from 
different SLAM technolo gies and TLS survey. 
1.The “Camerone” cave: one quite large and some smaller rooms connected thro ugh
narrow passages (Figure 5, Table 2); 
(a) (b) 
Figure 5. Sub-block 1: the “Camerone” cave ( a). An exploded view of the dense point cloud obtained, in this case, with the 
GuPho device ( b). 
Table 2. Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) [m] results for the sub-block 1. 
1. Camerone Cave  C2C  C2M  
Mean  st. dev.  Mean  st. dev. 
KAARTA Stencil 2 –16 0.0715 0 .1046 −0.012 1 0.1289 
GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon 0.0085 0.0147 −0.0052 0.0149 
GuPho 0.0099 0 .0196 0.0013 0 .0245
Figure 5. Sub-block 1: the “Camerone” cave ( a). An exploded view of the dense point cloud obtained, in this case, with the
GuPho device ( b).
Table 2. Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) [m] results for the sub-block 1.
1. Camerone CaveC2C C2M
Mean st. dev. Mean st. dev.
KAARTA Stencil 2–16 0.0715 0.1046  0.0121 0.1289
GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon 0.0085 0.0147  0.0052 0.0149
GuPho 0.0099 0.0196 0.0013 0.0245
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 10 of 18
2. The long corridor with niches, connected to the aboveground entrance (Figure 6,
Table 3);
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 10 of 19 
 
 
2. The long corridor with niches, connected to the aboveground entrance (Figure 6, 
Table 3); 
 
Figure 6. Sub-block 2, the corridor with niches of the “Corraducci” cave (a): a visual comparison along section A-A’ of the 
dense point clouds obtained with the MMSs and the refere nce TLS point cloud (b). 
Table 3. Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) [m] results for the sub-block 2. 
2. Corridor with niches  C2C  C2M  
Mean  st. dev.  Mean  st. dev. 
KAARTA Stencil 2 –16 0.0284 0.0392 0.0132 0.0484 
Figure 6. Sub-block 2, the corridor with niches of the “Corraducci” cave ( a): a visual comparison along section A-A’ of the
dense point clouds obtained with the MMSs and the reference TLS point cloud ( b).
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 11 of 18
Table 3. Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) [m] results for the sub-block 2.
2. Corridor with NichesC2C C2M
Mean st. dev. Mean st. dev.
KAARTA Stencil 2–16 0.0284 0.0392 0.0132 0.0484
GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon 0.0077 0.0155 0.0038 0.0172
GuPho 0.0129 0.0254  0.0036 0.0292
3. The straight corridor with stairs (Figure 7, Table 4);
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 11 of 19 
 
GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon 0.0077 0.0155 0.0038 0.0172 
GuPho 0.0129 0.0254 −0.0036 0.0292 
3. The straight corridor with stairs (Figure 7, Table 4); 
 
Figure 7. Sub-block 3, straight corridor with  stairs of the “Corraducci” cave (a): visual comparison along section B-B’ of 
the dense point clouds obtained with th e MMSs and the reference TLS point cloud (b). 
Table 4. Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) [m] results for the sub-block 3. 
3. Corridor with stairs  C2C  C2M  
Mean  st. dev.  Mean  st. dev. 
KAARTA Stencil 2 –16 0.0185 0.0252 −0.0005 0.0324 
GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon 0.0093 0.0075 0.0058 0.0109 
GuPho 0.0122 0.0159 −0.0037 0.0199 
 
4. The dodecagonal domed room with niches (Figures 8 and 9).  
 The comparison of sub-block 4 is done with  visual analyses, because of the variable 
completeness of the acquired data due to th e  chosen acquisition protocol focused on 
containing the mapping time, rather than co mpletely surveying this articulated area.  
 
Figure 7. Sub-block 3, straight corridor with stairs of the “Corraducci” cave ( a): visual comparison along section B-B’ of the
dense point clouds obtained with the MMSs and the reference TLS point cloud ( b).
Table 4. Cloud-to-Cloud (C2C) and Cloud-to-Mesh (C2M) [m] results for the sub-block 3.
3. Corridor with StairsC2C C2M
Mean st. dev. Mean st. dev.
KAARTA Stencil 2–16 0.0185 0.0252  0.0005 0.0324
GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon 0.0093 0.0075 0.0058 0.0109
GuPho 0.0122 0.0159  0.0037 0.0199
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 12 of 18
4. The dodecagonal domed room with niches (Figures 8 and 9).
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 12 of 19 
 
 
Figure 8. Sub-block 4, the dodecagonal domed room with niches (a): visual comparison along section C-C’ of the dense point 
clouds obtained with the MMSs and the reference TLS point cloud (b). 
Figure 8. Sub-block 4, the dodecagonal domed room with niches ( a): visual comparison along section C-C’ of the dense
point clouds obtained with the MMSs and the reference TLS point cloud ( b).
The comparison of sub-block 4 is done with visual analyses, because of the variable
completeness of the acquired data due to the chosen acquisition protocol focused on
containing the mapping time, rather than completely surveying this articulated area.
Metrics and visual analyses show that all the MMSs were able to rapidly acquire
the main geometry of the caves with errors ranging between 1 and 3 cm, although some
technologies proved to be more effective and less sensitive to the peculiar environmental
characteristic of this scenario. More speciﬁcally, the dark and uneven environmental
illumination did not allow the photogrammetric GuPho system to match the acquisition
speed of the other two systems (Table 1), or to reconstruct all the niches more completely.
This is more evident in the large dodecagonal room where, despite having followed similar
trajectories of the other two MMSs (Figures 8 and 9), the illuminator was not strong
enough to adequately light the niches. Nevertheless, the integrated motion-blur control
and automatic image selection worked properly and the 3D results obtained with GuPho
are in line with the other two commercial systems.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 13 of 18
Sustainability  2021 , 13, 13289 13 of 19 
 
 
Figure 9. Sub-block 4, the dodecagonal domed room with niches (a): visual comparison of a plan section of the dense point 
clouds obtained with the MMSs and the reference TLS point cloud (b). 
Metrics and visual analyses show that all the MMSs were able to rapidly acquire the 
main geometry of the caves with errors ranging between 1 and 3 cm, although some 
technologies proved to be more effective and less sensitive to the peculiar environmental 
characteristic of this scenario. More spec ifically, the dark and uneven environmental 
illumination did not allow the photogrammetric GuPho system to match the acquisition 
speed of the other two systems (Table 1), or to reconstruct all the niches more completely. 
This is more evident in the large dodecagonal room where, despite having followed 
similar trajectories of the other two MMSs (Figures 8 and 9), the illuminator was not strong enough to adequately light the niches. Neve rtheless, the integrated motion-blur control 
and automatic image selection worked properly and the 3D results obtained with GuPho 
are in line with the other two commercial systems.  
5. Discussion 
Quantitative and qualitative comparative analyses were performed unveiling new 
arguments of discussion for UBH surveying st rategies that are worth highlighting. The 
experiments, in fact, provide a great numb er of suggestions for users interested in 
undertaking strategies for the management and conservation of these fascinating settings. 
Indeed, considering 3D survey as the starting point for each intervention and/or decision-
making process, the comparative study here  presented paves the way for defining best 
practices in future acquisition campaigns. To do so, the comparison performed is 
Figure 9. Sub-block 4, the dodecagonal domed room with niches ( a): visual comparison of a plan section of the dense point
clouds obtained with the MMSs and the reference TLS point cloud ( b).
5. Discussion
Quantitative and qualitative comparative analyses were performed unveiling new
arguments of discussion for UBH surveying strategies that are worth highlighting. The
experiments, in fact, provide a great number of suggestions for users interested in undertak-
ing strategies for the management and conservation of these fascinating settings. Indeed,
considering 3D survey as the starting point for each intervention and/or decision-making
process, the comparative study here presented paves the way for deﬁning best practices
in future acquisition campaigns. To do so, the comparison performed is multifaceted, as
it considers off-the-shelf systems vs. a research prototype, range-based vs. image-based
systems, and mobile vs. static systems.
The ﬁrst point of discussion is about the acquisition and processing time. For all three
MMSs, it can be stated that the acquisition time was strongly reduced when compared with
that of TLS. The difference moves from some days to a few minutes of walking. The range-
based systems (namely, KAARTA Stencil 2–16 and GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon) outperformed
the image-based, which requires the user to move slowly to achieve a complete mapping.
This is due to the illumination conditions and the complexity of the environments, which
hamper the user to speed up the walking phase (in total, the acquisition time is four times
higher with visual SLAM, see Table 1). Even the post-processing phase is faster for the
commercial solutions: ad hoc software allows to get in output a ready-to-use product,
while the Visual SLAM requires a photogrammetric suite to achieve the ﬁnal dense cloud
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 14 of 18
(Table 1). Conversely, the color information is completely missing for the Stencil 2, while it
is possible to achieve a colored point cloud with the Zeb Horizon (by exploiting the video
stream), and, obviously, with the photogrammetric GuPho system. It must be said that
the achieved acquisition time obtained with the KAARTA and GeoSLAM Zeb Horizon
devices were the result of an acquisition strategy that relies upon the LiDAR data and
was therefore not optimized for the image acquisition. Therefore, the gap between the
time required for the acquisition using LiDAR and visual-based SLAM technology would
reduce signiﬁcantly in the case where a properly coloured point cloud would be necessary.
In such a case, the problems faced by GuPho would be common to all the devices used (for
example, with respect to image blur or unevenly lit surfaces). This ﬁrst analysis is in line
with the literature [ 41]. Many papers state that MMSs are suitable for their efﬁciency in
indoor spaces and articulated architectural, landscape, and archaeological settings where
GNSS positioning is not available. Besides, with respect to the TLS compartment, both
range- and image-based solutions are more rapid in both acquisition and processing (this
consideration is mainly addressed to the automatic pre-process of clouds, as seen when the
marked time trajectory must be carefully manually controlled). Broadly speaking, UBH are
considered “unfriendly environments” for surveyors hence, handheld portable MMSs are
recommended due to their compactness and handiness.
This ﬁrst recommendation, however, has to be evaluated depending on the output
product needed for representing the scene. If the committed by-product is a 2D represen-
tation, considering the comparisons in sub-blocks 1–2-3 (Figure 4), the Stencil provides a
standard deviation suitable for a 1:200 representation, while the Zeb Horizon and GuPho
allow to increase the scale up to 1:100. The more the trajectory increases in length, the
less the architectural details can be validated. For the full availability and handling of
architectural details, a scale of 1:50 or above is required, and more accurate clouds derived
from the TLS technique continue to be needed [ 38]. Conversely, if the results are conceived
for an overall 3D representation of the scene, the geometric information derived with a TLS
acquisition might be redundant. For both (H)BIM and virtual representations, the accuracy
of the MMSs is compliant with the ﬁnal purpose, as conﬁrmed in the literature [ 61]. Of
course, this aspect is normally case-speciﬁc, and there is not a generalizable approach for
the different existing UBH [20].
This latter comment, open to the great issue related to the inner factors of an UBH:
they can be natural or built, leading to several variables that are here discussed. The
models obtained with image-based MMSs have a higher resolution and point density than
those acquired with GeoSLAM [ 62]. However, this statement can be partially contested
if one considers the illumination. As shown in the comparison made for the sub-block 4
(Figures 8 and 9), niches with very low artiﬁcial illumination show missing data that have
instead been collected by the range-based solution. However, the performances of the latter
(and speciﬁcally for the Stencil) were badly affected by the scarce illumination, in terms of
trajectory. As depicted in Figure 3, the Stencil loses the orientation, and the sole LiDAR
sensor is not sufﬁcient to maintain the path for long walks. For this reason, it would be
meaningless to perform the comparison for the whole point clouds, and the dataset was
split into key representative areas [63].
A few last comments are deserved for the data quality (considering both spatial and
radiometric resolutions). The LiDAR devices deliver noisier data, however, the noise ob-
served in measurements performed with the Zeb Horizon is lower than the noise observed
in the Stencil cloud. This aspect is known and conﬁrmed in similar papers (where generally
more than 90% of the deviations between the clouds are less than 5 cm) [ 64]. In the case of
Camerano settings, our ﬁndings demonstrate that image-based solution delivers a dataset
with less noise, comparable with the TLS [ 65]. The lack of high-quality radiometric data
is still an unsolved issue for LiDAR-based solutions. Indeed, images can be projected on
the surface points in post-processing and this can facilitate the point matching for scan
registration, segmentation and other analyses of the clouds. The GuPho prototype delivers
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 15 of 18
a superior quality of radiometric information. LiDAR MMSs require a post-processing
phase for colouring the cloud, but still with scarce results [66,67].
6. Conclusions
In this paper, a comparative study between commercial handheld mobile off-the-shelf
and in-house solutions was performed. The objective was to provide the research commu-
nity with updated information about the possibility offered by new 3D mobile technologies,
instruments, and algorithms for the realization of 3D surveys. The chosen environment
was the UBH of Camerano (Italy) within the framework of the U4V COST action. Our
experiments were not devoted to ﬁnding the winning solution, but rather to deﬁne best
practices for different users, interested in undertaking 3D documentation, conservation and
valorization strategies for underground settings. Besides the documentation and digitiza-
tion purposes, especially for the preservation of the UBH, the 3D mapping was used to test
and validate some well-known and promising technologies in such particular scenarios.
The experimental protocol was set considering a TLS survey as the ground truth, and
peculiar areas of the whole caves have been analyzed in detail. Results have shown shelf
that LiDAR-based solutions are most suitable for non-expert users, as they provide reliable,
fast, and ready-to-use data, which require little expertise in data processing. Image-based
solutions, instead, return very detailed and complete reconstructions, at the expense of
slower and more complex acquisition and processing tasks. The commercial solutions, of
course, are more expensive, and this could result in a bottleneck for the Cultural Heritage,
which notoriously suffers from a lack of investments. The GuPho prototype here presented,
given the low cost of its hardware, is a straightforward solution, despite the fact that the
owners of these environments should rely on some training of its staff for a full exploitation
of the tool.
More in general, the 3D mapping of Cultural Heritage is essential for undertaking
decisions for the management of UBH. A clear analysis of the needs should be done a
priori, in order to decide the best surveying approach on the basis of the results shown.
The presented activities allowed, in fact, to highlight limitations and open research
issues in the 3D digitization of UBH: image-based approaches suffer from illumination
conditions and lack of texture, suggesting more robust key-point detectors and descriptors;
trajectory drifting could be reduced using more powerful and reliable SLAM methods
that fuse other sensor information, such as from inertial and magnetic sensors; and auto-
mated methods are needed to transform the collected 3D point-clouds in more usable 3D
information models.
Another important aspect not directly related to Geomatic is the existing knowledge
gaps that communities should acquire, by gaining speciﬁc competencies and skills that are,
nowadays, externalized. Local communities too often lack scientiﬁc and technical knowl-
edge, technological capabilities, and ﬁnancial resources for the satisfactory conservation
and re-use of UBH sites. In particular, they demand for surveys to understand complex
damage and decay mechanisms, long-term environmental processes, and medium- to
short-term natural, human, and ecological risks. Without surveys and monitoring tools that
are missing or considered too costly, many underground sites that once lost their original
function frequently remain as hidden and forgotten landscapes, lying abandoned and in
a bad state of conservation. Therefore, ﬁlling knowledge gaps and building capacity at a
local level represents a major challenge for UBH, and the work here proposed raises new
points for discussion that need to be considered by the administrations.
Data collected in this case study will be shared within the project dissemination plan
to promote the Camerano caves’ knowledge and fruition. This will be done with an ad
hoc platform where, besides visualizing the obtained point clouds in 3D, the user will
compare by himself the results of the presented comparison. Future efforts will be put
into the exploitation of information modeling of the acquired data. The digital reality-
based 3D model can be converted into a crucial reference frame for the understanding,
monitoring, and management of documentation, thus creating a data source (graphics
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 16 of 18
and semantics) that is suitable for assisting in conservation, preservation, and restoration
projects, implementing Historic Building Information Modeling (HBIM) products. Even
today, in the practice of the restoration and preservation of Built Cultural Heritage (BCH),
the (H)BIM tool is still not widespread and often used as advanced CAD, neglecting its
essence: information and its sharing. Finally, additional spherical photos acquired along
the underground path will integrate the remote visit to these structures, allowing the user
to experience a virtual tour in the hidden Camerano treasure.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, F.D.S. and R.P .; Data curation, F.D.S., E.M.F., F.M. and
F.R.; Formal analysis, R.P . and F.R.; Methodology, F.D.S., A.T., E.M.F., R.P . and F.M.; Supervision, F.R.;
Validation, A.T., E.M.F., F.M. and F.R.; Writing–original draft, F.D.S., A.T., E.M.F., R.P ., F.M. and F.R.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No online data available.
Acknowledgments: The activities described in this paper have been carried out under the framework
of Underground4Value (U4V) COST Action (CA18110). The authors would like to express their
gratitude to the administration of Camerano (in the ﬁgure of Ilaria Fioretti) for providing the dataset,
curated by Studio Associato PROECO, and to OPERA Societ àCooperativa Sociale (in the ﬁgure of
Luca Luzi) for allowing the surveying activities.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Beraldin, J.A.; Picard, M.; Bandiera, A.; Valzano, V .; Negro, F. Best practices for the 3D documentation of the Grotta dei Cervi of
Porto Badisco, Italy. Proc. SPIE 2011 ,7864 , 78640J. [CrossRef]
2. Farella, E.; Menna, F.; Nocerino, E.; Morabito, D.; Remondino, F.; Campi, M. Knowledge and Valorization of Historical Sites
through 3D Documentation and Modeling. ISPRS Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2016 ,XLI-B5 , 255–262.
[CrossRef]
3. Xiao, W.; Mills, J.; Guidi, G.; Rodr íguez-Gonz álvez, P .; Gonizzi Barsanti, S.; Gonz ález-Aguilera, D. Geoinformatics for the
conservation and promotion of cultural heritage in support of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens. 2018 ,142, 389–406. [CrossRef]
4. Caciora, T.; Herman, G.V .; Ilie s,, A.; Baias, S,.; Ilie s,, D.C.; Josan, I.; Hodor, N. The Use of Virtual Reality to Promote Sustainable
Tourism: A Case Study of Wooden Churches Historical Monuments from Romania. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 1758. [CrossRef]
5. Cai, Z.; Fang, C.; Zhang, Q.; Chen, F. Joint development of cultural heritage protection and tourism: The case of Mount Lushan
cultural landscape heritage site. Herit. Sci. 2021 ,9, 86. [CrossRef]
6. Nocerino, E.; Menna, F.; Toschi, I.; Morabito, D.; Remondino, F.; Rodr íguez-Gonz álvez, P . Valorisation of history and landscape
for promoting the memory of WWI. J. Cult. Herit. 2018 ,29, 113–122. [CrossRef]
7. Holtorf, C. Conservation and Heritage As Creative Processes of Future-Making. Int. J. Cult. Prop. 2020 ,27, 277–290. [CrossRef]
8. Labadi, S.; Giliberto, F.; Rosetti, I.; Shetabi, L.; Yildirim, E. Heritage and the Sustainable Development Goals: Policy Guidance for
Heritage and Development Actors ; ICOMOS Publication: Charenton-le-Pont, France, 2021.
9. Boboc, R.G.; Dugulean ă, M.; Voinea, G.-D.; Postelnicu, C.-C.; Popovici, D.-M.; Carrozzino, M. Mobile Augmented Reality for
Cultural Heritage: Following the Footsteps of Ovid among Different Locations in Europe. Sustainability 2019 ,11, 1167. [CrossRef]
10. Voinea, G.D.; Girbacia, F.; Postelnicu, C.C.; Marto, A. Exploring Cultural Heritage Using Augmented Reality Through Google’s
Project Tango and ARCore. In VR Technologies in Cultural Heritage. VRTCH 2018. Communications in Computer and Information
Science ; Dugulean ă, M., Carrozzino, M., Gams, M., Tanea, I., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; Volume 904. [CrossRef]
11. Torresani, A.; Rigon, S.; Farella, E.M.; Menna, F.; Remondino, F. Unveiling large-scale historical contents with V-SLAM and
markerless mobile AR solutions. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci. 2021 ,XLVI-M-1-2021 , 761–768. [CrossRef]
12. Clini, P .; Nespeca, R.; Angeloni, R.; Mammoli, R. The integrated survey of narrow spaces and underground architecture: The case
study of Campana caves bas-reliefs. ISPRS Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2019 ,XLII-2/W9 , 277–282. [CrossRef]
13. Teruggi, S.; Grilli, E.; Fassi, F.; Remondino, F. 3D surveying, semantic enrichment and virtual access of large cultural heritage.
ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci. 2021 ,VIII-M-1-2021 , 155–162. [CrossRef]
14. Jung, K.; Nguyen, V .T.; Piscarac, D.; Yoo, S.-C. Meet the virtual Jeju Dol Harubang—The mixed VR/AR application for cultural
immersion in Korea’s main heritage. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2020 ,9, 367. [CrossRef]
15. Nex, F.C.; Rinaudo, F. LiDAR or photogrammetry? Integration is the answer. Eur. J. Remote Sens. 2011 ,43, 107–121. [CrossRef]
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 17 of 18
16. Remondino, F.; Menna, F.; Koutsoudis, A.; Chamzas, C.; El-Hakim, S. 2013: Design and implement a reality-based 3D zdigitization
and modelling project. In 2013 Digital Heritage International Congress (DigitalHeritage) ; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013; Volume 1,
pp. 137–144. Available online: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6743723 (accessed on 30 September 2021).
17. Ramos, M.; Remondino, F. Data fusion in Cultural Heritage—A Review. ISPRS Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2015 ,
XL-5/W7 , 359–363. [CrossRef]
18. Pavlidis, G. Applying Innovative Technologies in Heritage Science ; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2020. [CrossRef]
19. Vanegas, C.; Aliaga, D.; Benes, B. 2010: Building reconstruction using Manhattan-World grammars. In 2010 IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2010; pp. 358–365. Available online:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5540190 (accessed on 15 October 2021).
20. Varriale, R. Underground Built Heritage: A Theoretical Approach for the Deﬁnition of an International Class. Heritage 2021 ,4,
1092–1118. [CrossRef]
21. Lo Presti, O.; Carli, M.R. Italian Catacombs and Their Digital Presence for Underground Heritage Sustainability. Sustainability
2021 ,13, 12010. [CrossRef]
22. Pace, G.; Salvarani, R. (Eds.) Underground Built Heritage Valorisation. A Handbook ; CNR: Rome, Italy, 2021. [CrossRef]
23. Ebolese, D.; Lo Brutto, M.; Dardanelli, G. The integrated 3D survey for underground archaeological environment. Int. Arch.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci. 2019 ,XLII-2/W9 , 311–317. [CrossRef]
24. Underground4Value. CA18110 Underground Built Heritage as Catalyser for Community Valorisation. Available online: https:
//underground4value.eu/ (accessed on 15 October 2021).
25. Dewez TJ, B.; Yart, S.; Thuon, Y.; Pannet, P .; Plat, E. Towards cavity-collapse hazard maps with Zeb-Revo handheld laser scanner
point clouds. Photogramm. Rec. 2017 ,32, 354–376. [CrossRef]
26. Zlot, R.; Bosse, M. Three-dimensional mobile mapping of caves. J. Cave Karst Stud. 2014 ,76, 191–206. [CrossRef]
27. Eyre, M.; Wetherelt, A.; Coggan, J. Evaluation of automated underground mapping solutions for mining and civil engineering
applications. J. Appl. Remote Sens. 2016 ,10, 046011. [CrossRef]
28. Mattes, J. Underground ﬁeldwork—A cultural and social history of cave cartography and surveying instruments in the 19th and
at the beginning of the 20th century. Int. J. Speleol. 2015 ,44, 251–266. [CrossRef]
29. Wang, W.; Zhao, W.; Huang, L.; Vimarlund, V .; Wang, Z. Applications of terrestrial laser scanning for tunnels: A review. J. Trafﬁc
Transp. Eng. 2014 ,1, 325–337. [CrossRef]
30. Nocerino, E.; Fiorillo, F.; Minto, S.; Menna, F.; Remondino, F. A non-conventional procedure for the 3D modeling of WWI forts.
Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci. 2014 ,XL-5 , 457–464. [CrossRef]
31. Szwarkowski, D.; Moskal, M. Assessment of deformations in mining areas using the Riegl VZ-400 terrestrial laser scanner. In E3S
Web of Conferences ; EDP Sciences: Les Ulis, France, 2018; Volume 36, p. 02009. [CrossRef]
32. Fabbri, S.; Sauro, F.; Santagata, T.; Rossi, G.; De Waele, J. High-resolution 3-D mapping using terrestrial laser scanning as a tool
for geomorphological and speleogenetical studies in caves: An example from the Lessini mountains (North Italy). Geomorphology
2017 ,280, 16–29. [CrossRef]
33. Rodríguez-Gonz álvez, P .; Nocerino, E.; Menna, F.; Minto, S.; Remondino, F. 3D surveying & modeling of underground passages
in WWI fortiﬁcations. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2015 ,40, 17–24. [CrossRef]
34. Pukansk á, K.; Bartoš, K.; Bella, P .; Sabov á, J. Comparison of non-contact surveying technologies for modelling underground
morphological structures. Acta Montan. Slovaca 2017 ,22, 246–256.
35. Nocerino, E.; Rodr íguez-Gonz álvez, P .; Menna, F. Introduction to mobile mapping with portable systems. In Laser Scanning ; CRC
Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2019; pp. 37–52.
36. Di Stefano, F.; Chiappini, S.; Gorreja, A.; Balestra, M.; Pierdicca, R. Mobile 3D scan LiDAR: A literature review. Geomat. Nat.
Hazards Risk 2021 ,12, 2387–2429. [CrossRef]
37. Farella, E.M. 3D Mapping of Underground Environments with a Hand-Held Laser Scanner. In Proceedings of the SIFET Annual
Conference, Lecce, Italy, 8–10 June 2016.
38. Sammartano, G.; Span ò, A. Point clouds by SLAM-based mobile mapping systems: Accuracy and geometric content validation in
multisensor survey and stand-alone acquisition. Appl. Geomat. 2018 ,10, 317–339. [CrossRef]
39. Raval, S.S.; Banerjee, B.P .; Kumar Singh, S.; Canbulat, I. A Preliminary Investigation of Mobile Mapping Technology for
Underground Mining. In IGARSS 2019—2019 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium ; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ,
USA, 2019; pp. 6071–6074. [CrossRef]
40. Blaser, S.; Nebiker, S.; Wisler, D. Portable image-based high performance mobile mapping system in underground environments—
system conﬁguration and performance evaluation. ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci. 2019 ,IV-2/W5 , 255–262.
[CrossRef]
41. Giordan, D.; Godone, D.; Baldo, M.; Piras, M.; Grasso, N.; Zerbetto, R. Survey Solutions for 3D Acquisition and Representation of
Artiﬁcial and Natural Caves. Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 6482. [CrossRef]
42. Ellmann, A.; Kütimets, K.; Varbla, S.; Väli, E.; Kanter, S. Advancements in underground mine surveys by using SLAM-enabled
handheld laser scanners. Surv. Rev. 2021 , 1–12. [CrossRef]
43. Goad, C.C. The Ohio State University Highway Mapping Project: The Positioning Component. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual
Meeting of The Institute of Navigation (1991), Williamsburg, VA, USA, 10–12 June 1991; pp. 117–120.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 13289 18 of 18
44. Gollob, C.; Ritter, T.; Nothdurft, A. Forest Inventory with Long Range and High-Speed Personal Laser Scanning (PLS) and
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) Technology. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1509. [CrossRef]
45. Puente, I.; Arias, P . Review of mobile mapping and surveying technologies. Measurement 2013 ,46, 2127–2145. [CrossRef]
46. Durrant-Whyte, H.; Bailey, T. Simultaneous localization and mapping: Part I. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 2006 ,13, 99–110.
[CrossRef]
47. Bailey, T.; Durrant-Whyte, H. Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM): Part II. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 2006 ,13, 108–117.
[CrossRef]
48. Cadena, C.; Carlone, L.; Carrillo, H.; Latif, Y.; Scaramuzza, D.; Neira, J.; Reid, I.; Leonard, J.J. Past, present, and future of
simultaneous localization and mapping: Toward the robust-perception age. IEEE Trans. Robot. 2016 ,32, 1309–1332. [CrossRef]
49. Hess, W.; Kohler, D.; Rapp, H.; Andor, D. Real-Time Loop Closure in 2D LIDAR SLAM. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Stockholm, Sweden, 16–20 May 2016; pp. 1271–1278. [CrossRef]
50. Mur-Artal, R.; Montiel, J.M.M.; Tardos, J.D. ORB-SLAM: A Versatile and Accurate Monocular SLAM System. In Proceedings of
the IEEE transactions on robotics, Stockholm, Sweden, 16–21 May 2015; Volume 31, pp. 1147–1163. [CrossRef]
51. Newcombe, R.A.; Izadi, S.; Hilliges, O.; Molyneaux, D.; Kim, D.; Davison, A.J.; Kohi, P .; Shotton, J.; Hodges, S.; Fitzgibbon, A.
Kinectfusion: Real-Time Dense Surface Mapping and Tracking. In Proceedings of the 2011 10th IEEE International Symposium
On Mixed And Augmented Reality, Basel, Switzerland, 26–29 October 2011; pp. 127–136. [CrossRef]
52. Bizzarri, R.; Baldanza, A.; Luccioni, I.; Recanatini, A. The geology of the Camerano area through the reconstruction of sedimentary
sequences of the urban caves. Geol. Croat. 2013 ,66, 205–218. [CrossRef]
53. Soriano, F. Le Antiche Fonti dei Corpi Arenacei Plio-Pleistocenici Dell’anconetano: Valenza di un Tempo e Stato Attuale. Geol.
Dell’Ambiente n. 3/2017 2017 , 133–142.
54. Recanatini, A.; Campagnoli, M. La Memoria del Sottosuolo: Cavit àArtiﬁciali e Sistemi Ipogei Sotto i Centri Storici Alle Falde del Conero
Ed in Area Mesoadriatica ; Atti del Convegno di studi: Camerano, Italy, 1999; Volume 14, di Quaderni di storia cameranese.
55. Recanatini, A. La Citt àSegreta, Correlazioni tra Sviluppo Urbano di Superﬁcie e Rete Ipogea Nei Centri Storici Alle Falde del Conero. Il
Caso di Camerano e Osimo ; Atti del Convegno di studi: Camerano, Italy, 1999; Volume 17, p. 18.
56. Grotte di Camerano. Available online: http://www.grottedicamerano.it/en/home.html (accessed on 30 September 2021).
57. Stencil 2-16—KAARTA. Available online: https://www.kaarta.com/products/stencil-2-for-rapid-long-range-mobile-mapping/
(accessed on 31 May 2021).
58. ZEB Horizon—GeoSLAM. Available online: https://geoslam.com/solutions/zeb-horizon/ (accessed on 31 May 2021).
59. Torresani, A.; Menna, F.; Battisti, R.; Remondino, F. A V-SLAM Guided and Portable System for Photogrammetric Applications.
Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 2351. [CrossRef]
60. Sumikura, S.; Shibuya, M.; Sakurada, K. OpenVSLAM: A versatile Visual SLAM framework. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, Nice, France, 21–25 October 2019; pp. 2292–2295. [CrossRef]
61. Previtali, M.; Banﬁ, F.; Brumana, R. Handheld 3D Mobile Scanner (SLAM): Data Simulation and Acquisition for BIM Modelling.
InInternational Workshop on R3 in Geomatics: Research, Results and Review ; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 256–266.
[CrossRef]
62. Fei, L.; Jaboyedoff, M.; Pullarello, J.; Derron, M.H.; Guerin, A.; Noël, F. Qualitative comparison of point clouds acquired by
LiDAR, SfM, GeoSLAM and Sense 3D for the erosion quantiﬁcation of a rock wall. In Geophysical Research Abstracts ; 2019; p. 21.
63. Lehtola, V .V .; Kaartinen, H.; Nüchter, A.; Kaijaluoto, R.; Kukko, A.; Litkey, P .; Honkavaara, E.; Rosnell, T.; Vaaja, M.T.; Virtanen,
J.-P .; et al. Comparison of the Selected State-Of-The-Art 3D Indoor Scanning and Point Cloud Generation Methods. Remote Sens.
2017 ,9, 796. [CrossRef]
64. Salgues, H.; Macher, H.; Landes, T. Evaluation of Mobile Mapping Systems for Indoor Surveys. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote
Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci. 2020 ,XLIV-4/W1-2020 , 119–125. [CrossRef]
65. Trzeciak, M.; Brilakis, I. Comparison of Accuracy and Density Of Static And Mobile Laser Scanners. In Proceedings of the 2021
European Conference on Computing in Construction, Rhodes, Greece, 19–18 July 2021. [CrossRef]
66. Bronzino GP , C.; Grasso, N.; Matrone, F.; Osello, A.; Piras, M. Laser-Visual-Inertial Odometry Based Solution For 3d Heritage
Modeling: The Sanctuary Of The Blessed Virgin Of Trompone. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci. 2019 ,
XLII-2/W15 , 215–222. [CrossRef]
67. Di Stefano, F.; Cabrelles, M.; Garc ía-Asenjo, L.; Lerma, J.L.; Malinverni, E.S.; Baselga, S.; Garrigues, P .; Pierdicca, R. Evaluation of
Long-Range Mobile Mapping System (MMS) and Close-Range Photogrammetry for Deformation Monitoring. A Case Study of
Cortes de Pall ás in Valencia (Spain). Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 6831. [CrossRef]
