Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284  
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Journal  of Cultural  Heritage  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/culher  
Review  
A framework  study  on the use of immersive  XR technologies  in the 
cultural  heritage  domain  
Chiara  Innocente  ∗, Luca Ulrich  , Sandro  Moos  , Enrico  Vezzetti  
Department  of Management,  Production  and Design, Politecnico  di Torino, C.so Duca degli Abruzzi, 24, Torino 10129, Italy 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received  2 November  2022 
Accepted  3 June 2023 
Available  online 15 June 2023 
Keywords:  
Mixed reality (MR) 
Augmented  reality (AR) 
Virtual reality (VR) 
Cultural heritage 
Digital heritage 
Head-mounted  display (HMD) a b s t r a c t 
Most cultural  promotion  and dissemination  are nowadays  performed  through  the digitization  of heritage  
sites and museums,  a necessary  requirement  to meet the new needs of the public. Augmented  Reality 
(AR), Mixed Reality (MR), and Virtual Reality (VR) have the potential  to improve  the experience  quality 
and educational  effect of these sites by stimulating  users’ senses in a more natural and vivid way. In this 
respect,  head-mounted  display (HMD) devices allow visitors to enhance  the experience  of cultural  sites 
by digitizing  information  and integrating  additional  virtual cues about cultural  artifacts,  resulting  in a 
more immersive  experience  that engages  the visitor both physically  and emotionally.  
This study contributes  to the development  and incorporation  of AR, MR, and VR applications  in the 
cultural  heritage  domain  by providing  an overview  of relevant  studies utilizing  fully immersive  systems,  
such as headsets  and CAVE systems,  emphasizing  the advantages  that they bring when compared  to 
handheld  devices.  We propose  a framework  study to identify  the key features  of headset-based  Extended  
Reality (XR) technologies  used in the cultural  heritage  domain  that boost immersion,  sense of presence,  
and agency. Furthermore,  we highlight  core characteristics  that favor the adoption  of these systems  over 
more traditional  solutions  (e.g., handheld  devices),  as well as unsolved  issues that must be addressed  to 
improve  the guests’ experience  and the appreciation  of the cultural  heritage.  
An extensive  search of Google Scholar,  Scopus, IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital Library, and Wiley Online 
Library databases  was conducted,  including  papers published  from January  2018 to September  2022. 
To improve  review reporting,  the Preferred  Reporting  Items for Systematic  Reviews  and Meta-Analyses  
(PRISMA)  guidelines  were used. Sixty-ﬁve  papers met the inclusion  criteria and were classiﬁed  depending  
on the study’s purpose:  education,  entertainment,  edutainment,  touristic  guidance  systems,  accessibility,  
visitor proﬁling,  and management.  
Immersive  cultural  heritage  systems  allow visitors to feel completely  immersed  and present in the 
virtual environment,  providing  a stimulating  and educational  cultural  experience  that can improve  the 
quality and learning  purposes  of cultural  visits. Nonetheless,  the analyzed  studies revealed  some limita- 
tions that must be faced to give a further impulse  to the adoption  of these technologies  in the cultural  
heritage  domain.  
©2 0 2 3 The Authors.  Published  by Elsevier  Masson  SAS on behalf of Consiglio  Nazionale  delle Ricerche  
(CNR). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ) 
1. Introduction  
Recently,  a growing  number  of studies  have highlighted  the 
advantages  of using immersive  reality technologies  and Human-  
Computer  Interaction  (HCI) methods  for knowledge  dissemination  
in the cultural  heritage  domain  [1] . Although  there is still a need 
to investigate  the limitations  of such technologies,  such as the lack 
of real-time  and consistent  tracking  and registration  techniques  [2] , 
∗Corresponding  author. 
E-mail addresses:  chiara.innocente@polito.it  (C. Innocente),  luca.ulrich@polito.it  
(L. Ulrich), sandro.moos@polito.it  (S. Moos), enrico.vezzetti@polito.it  (E. Vezzetti)  . or the need to naturalize  user interaction  in such applications  [3] , 
Extended  Reality  (XR) technologies  are on the rise in the ﬁeld of 
virtual heritage  and are now widely adopted  in museums,  heritage  
sites, and archaeological  sites around  the world. Indeed,  the digiti- 
zation of cultural  sites and museums  plays a signiﬁcant  role in the 
promotion  and dissemination  of culture,  and it is now required  to 
meet new public needs [4] . 
Augmented  Reality  (AR), Mixed Reality  (MR), and Virtual  Reality  
(VR) can enhance  the visitor’s  experience  by increasing  sensations  
[5] , emotions  [6] , cognition  [7] , and skills [8] when compared  to 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.culher.2023.06.001  
1296-2074/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS on behalf of Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR). This is an open access article u nder the CC BY  
license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ) 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
the real world. Virtual  information  is integrated  into the real en- 
vironment  by means of smart devices  such as handheld  devices,  
head-mounted  displays  (HMDs),  and space displays  [9] , although  
mobile  devices  such as handheld  devices  and HMDs are preferred  
for cultural  applications  [10] . 
Cultural  heritage  applications  based on mobile  XR devices  en- 
able visitors  to deepen  their knowledge  and enhance  their expe- 
rience of cultural  sites by being able to digitize  information  and 
merge virtual information  about cultural  artifacts,  like texts, ani- 
mations,  models,  and audio in the real world. From the individual  
user’s perspective,  these technologies  when used in cultural  sites 
really have the potential  to improve  experience  quality  and edu- 
cational  effect, stimulating  their senses more naturally  and vividly 
[11] . 
The use of MR, AR, and VR through  handheld  devices  does not 
realize its full potential.  The use of smartphones  and tablets allows 
visitors  to instantly  access a wealth  of information,  reach points 
of interest  (POIs), or obtain further  information  and suggestions  
on speciﬁc  attractions  but requires  a momentary  interruption  of 
the visiting  experience  to access the handheld  device [12] . On the 
other hand, using HMDs such information  can be provided  directly  
in the user’s ﬁeld of view, ensuring  a seamless  and uninterrupted  
experience.  
Recently,  a signiﬁcant  number  of low-cost  immersive  reality 
headsets  have appeared  on the market  with improved  graphics  
capabilities,  location  sensors,  and rendering.  Therefore,  immersive  
reality headsets  and HCI methods  are being used in the ﬁeld of 
cultural  heritage  to enhance  education,  exploration,  and exhibi-  
tions. These advances  could move traditional  museums  and cul- 
tural venues  towards  the installation  of immersive  reality technolo-  
gies, changing  visitors’  expectations  and the future design of cul- 
tural experiences.  
The remainder  of this paper is structured  as follows:  
Section  2 illustrates  the main objectives  of this paper, Section  3 de- 
scribes  the methods  for selecting  and organizing  scientiﬁc  papers 
relevant  to the review’s  purpose.  Section  4 provides  an overview  of 
the included  studies.  Section  5 addresses  a broad range of beneﬁts  
and current  challenges  in the world of XR headset-based  applica-  
tions for cultural  heritage,  and Section  6 draws conclusions.  
2. Research  aim 
For the above-mentioned  reasons,  in this review,  we focus on 
applications  in the cultural  heritage  domain  using immersive  XR 
systems  such as headsets  and Cave Automatic  Virtual  Environment  
(CAVE)  systems,  in which the immersivity,  sense of presence,  and 
agency  reach their highest  expression  [13] . As a result, our aim is 
to answer  the following  research  questions:  
RQ1: Which kind of applications  involving  XR headsets  and CAVE 
systems  are currently  employed  in the cultural  heritage  do- 
main? 
RQ2: What advantages  and limitations  characterize  immersive  XR 
headsets  compared  to more traditional  handheld  technolo-  
gies when involved  in cultural  heritage  applications?  
RQ3: Which task-speciﬁc  design,  development,  and usability  is- 
sues arise from XR headset-based  cultural  heritage  applica-  
tions? 
Therefore,  a framework  study is proposed  to identify  the key 
features  of headset-based  AR/MR/VR  technologies,  and the rela- 
tionship  between  these technological  aspects  and the visitor’s  ex- 
perience,  determining  whether  there are core attributes  that favor 
the adoption  of these systems  over traditional  solutions,  and un- 
solved issues that need to be addressed  to give a further  impulse  
to the inclusion  of these technologies  in the cultural  heritage  do- 
main. 3. Material  and methods  
3.1. Literature  search 
The goal of this analysis  was to determine  which categories  
of cultural  heritage  applications  already  use XR headsets,  as well 
as what advantages  and issues were found in this area. The pur- 
pose of the data collection  procedure  was to garner a collection  of 
works with the potential  to address  the research  questions  under 
consideration.  
The following  electronic  databases  were thoroughly  searched  to 
retrieve  the published  research  articles:  Google  Scholar,  Scopus,  
IEEE Xplore,  ACM Digital Library,  and Wiley Online Library.  The 
online digital libraries  search has been performed  by two review-  
ers in September  2022. To focus on the most recent advances  in 
this ﬁeld, the search is limited  by publication  year: only English-  
language  articles  published  between  January  2018 and September  
2022, inclusive,  were taken into account  for our research.  
The following  keywords  were employed  when searching  for ar- 
ticles: Cultural  Heritage;  Culture;  Museum;  Museums;  Digital cul- 
ture; Digital Museum;  Virtual  Museum;  Augmented  Reality;  Vir- 
tual Reality;  Mixed Reality;  Extended  Reality;  Immersive  technolo-  
gies; Headset;  Head-Mounted-Display;  Smart glass. All the research  
terms were individually  or collectively  examined.  Terms with simi- 
lar concepts  were aggregated  with “OR” to  collect a comprehensive  
list of articles,  while “AND” was  used to relate technological  solu- 
tions and the domain  of interest.  
3.2. Selection  process  
The current  complies  with the Preferred  Reporting  Items on 
Systematic  Reviews  and Meta-analysis  (PRISMA)  standards.  Search-  
ing for pertinent  documents  in the databases,  chosen  on the basis 
of their relevance  to our work, we took into account  speciﬁc  inclu- 
sion and exclusion  criteria.  The inclusion  criteria  are provided  in 
the following  list: 
• Papers have been published  between  January  2018 and Septem-  
ber 2022 inclusive;  
• Papers are published  in the English  language;  
• CAVE systems  or XR headsets  are used in applications  for the 
cultural  heritage  domain;  
• Studies  have been indexed  by Scopus.  
The exclusion  criteria  are highlighted  in the second  list below:  
• Review  articles,  theses,  web pages, or oral presentations;  
• Non-English  papers;  
• Applications  for cultural  heritage  domain  not employing  XR 
technology;  
• XR-based  applications  for cultural  heritage  domain  employ-  
ing non-immersive  2D handheld  devices,  such as smartphones,  
tablets,  or desktops;  
• Articles  without  available  full text. 
After duplication  removal,  titles and abstracts  were used as a 
ﬁrst step in the eligibility  screening  process  for articles,  followed  
by a full-text  analysis.  The studies  were then divided  into sub- 
groups  based on the topic matter to which they were applied.  
Fig. 1 schematizes  the selection  procedure.  
3.3. Quality  assessment  
After paper selection,  a quality  assessment  process  has been 
conducted  on the selected  works to determine  their consistency.  
Different  factors were considered  in order to assess quality,  re- 
ferring to criteria  selected  by Kitchenham  et al. [14] and adapted  
for the evaluation  of studies  for review purposes.  Two academics  
269
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
Fig. 1. Flowchart  featuring  the paper screening  process. The ﬂowchart  is prepared  in accordance  with the PRISMA template.  
worked  separately  on the evaluation  grading  each paper on a 
scale of 1 to 3 (low, moderate,  and high). A third researcher  re- 
peated the procedure  only when the results differed,  indepen-  
dently deciding  which score to assign. The cumulative  weight  of 
evidence  (woe) [15] has been calculated  for every publication  by 
assigning  scores to each of the following  questions,  with a scale 
ranging  from 5 to 15, where 5 corresponds  to low, and 15 to 
high: 
1. Are the design and structure  of the research  appropriate?  
2. Is the research  methodology  transparently  reported?  
3. Are the ﬁndings  consistent  with data and analysis?  
4. Is the interpretation  of results adequately  supported  by data? 
5. Is the research  design allowing  us to ﬁnd relevant  information  
to answer  the research  questions?  
Fig. 2 shows the histogram  of the frequency  distribution  of woe. 
As seen in the diagram,  the majority  of the selected  papers re- 
ceived high scores, and the average  position  was found to be 10.70. 
It was expected  to be high, as we considered  studies  that were Fig. 2. Quality assessment.  Frequency  distribution  histogram  of woe assigned  to 
each paper. 
published  in Scopus-indexed  peer-reviewed  scientiﬁc  journals  and 
conferences.  
270 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
Fig. 3. Diagrams  resume statistical  analysis performed  on results obtained  from paper selections.  (a) shows the occurrences  of the analyzed  studies grouped by aim. (b) 
highlights  the involved XR technologies  and (c) the adopted devices. (d) displays the locations  where the solutions  were intended  to be employed.  
4. Results  
This review considered  sixty-ﬁve  studies  to be signiﬁcant,  and 
the collected  data were analyzed  in Microsoft  Excel. Table 1 
describes  the qualitative  characteristics  of the included  studies,  
speciﬁcally  the author,  the year of publication,  the XR technol-  
ogy involved,  the main purpose  and the type of study, the type 
of headset,  smart glass or HMD used as a visualization  tool, the 
location  where the developed  products  are intended  to be used. 
The diagrams  in Fig. 3 summarize  the results from Table 1 . 
According  to the main purpose  of the developed  application,  
the vast majority  of the case studies  concern  applications  in- 
tended  for education  ( n = 13 ) and entertainment  ( n = 13 ) purposes  
( Fig. 3 (a)). This is understandable  given the educational  nature of 
cultural  venues  as well as the growing  desire to provide  visitors  
with a complete  experience  in which the educational  process  of 
learning  is accompanied  by playfulness  and enjoyment  of the cul- 
tural experience.  This idea is expressed  by the neologism  ‘Edutain-  
ment’, which emphasizes  the importance  of incorporating  stimu- 
lating and entertaining  activities  into the learning  process  and has 
been considered  as a stand-alone  category  ( n = 11 ). A large num- 
ber of studies  also concern  applications  to promote  cultural  site ac- 
cessibility  ( n = 13 ) in terms of architectural  barriers  removal,  mak- 
ing accessible  places that are unreachable  to most (such as un- 
derwater  archaeological  sites), or reconstructing  cultural  sites that 
have been lost or destroyed.  Many studies  have also explored  the 
possibility  of using HMDs for the development  of tour guide sys- 
tems to aid or replace  human  museum  guides ( n = 11 ). Only fewer 
studies  were found to deal with visitor proﬁling  ( n = 2 ) and her- 
itage site management  ( n = 2 ). 
As the graph in Fig. 3 (b) shows, nearly 75% of the studies  exam- 
ined deal with VR applications  ( n = 46 ), while only slightly  more 
than 25% deal with AR/MR  applications  ( n = 6 , n = 13 ). As a result, 
the type of headset  used reﬂects  this division:  as seen in Fig. 3 (c) 
the Oculus VR headset,  in its various  models,  is the most com- monly used in cultural  heritage  applications  ( n = 23 ). HoloLens,  
both 1 and 2, is the second  most popular  HMD ( n = 15 ). This is 
explained  by the fact that the best-selling  visors are Oculus and 
HoloLens,  whose technical  characteristics  make them particularly  
suitable  for these purposes.  Only three studies  used a stereoscope,  
and only one study reported  the use of a CAVE system  for cultural  
heritage  applications.  
The majority  of the environments  for which the applications  are 
intended  are indoor environments  ( n = 58 ), particularly  museums  
( n = 28 ) ( Fig. 3 (d)). In fact, museums  have used these technolo-  
gies to enhance  their customers’  visiting  experiences  by offering  
personalized  visits with digital content  created  speciﬁcally  for the 
historical  and cultural  context  of their resources.  Only a small per- 
centage  of applications,  such as old city center exploration  ( n = 2 ), 
and archaeological  site excavations  discovery  ( n = 5 ), are intended  
for outdoor  use. These applications  are more diﬃcult  to develop  
because  the visitor’s  experience  is strongly  related  to the outdoor  
environmental  conditions,  such as the delimitation  of the area re- 
served for the virtual experience  and the management  of obstacles.  
Based on this division,  the studies  were grouped  as fol- 
lows: studies  intended  for education  purposes  ( Section  4.1 ), stud- 
ies intended  for entertainment  purposes  ( Section  4.2 ), studies  
intended  for both education  and entertainment  (edutainment)  
purposes  ( Section  4.3 ), touristic  guidance  system  applications  
( Section  4.4 ), applications  intended  to enhance  accessibility  to her- 
itage sites ( Section  4.5 ), implementation  of visitor proﬁling  studies  
( Section  4.6 ) and studies  that present  heritage  site management  
implications  ( Section  4.7 ). 
4.1. Education  
Involving  the public in cultural  tasks is of utmost  importance  
for museum  institutions.  An effective  tool that allows them to 
achieve  this goal while reaching  out to the public eﬃciently  con- 
sists of immersive  XR technologies.  HMDs allow to display  the en- 
271 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
Table 1 
Analyzed  studies presenting  XR headset-based  solutions  in the cultural heritage domain. 
Authors Publication  
year XR 
Technology  Purpose Type of study Location Visualization  tool 
Aiello et al. [16] 2019 VR Edutainment  Application  Museum  Oculus Rift 
Anastasovitis  et al. [17] 2018 VR Edutainment  Application  Museum  Oculus Rift 
Argyriou  et al. [18] 2020 VR Guidance  Design & 
Development  Historical  centre Oculus Rift  
Balbi et al. [19] 2021 VR Accessibility  Design & 
Development  Not speciﬁed  Oculus Rift 
Banﬁ et al. [20] 2021 VR Education  Application  Heritage  site Oculus Rift 
Baradaran  et al. [21] 2022 VR Edutainment  Evaluation  Museum  HTC Vive 
Barbera et al. [22] 2022 VR Accessibility  Application  Heritage  site Stereoscope  + CAVE 
system + Oculus Quest 
2 
Barreau et al. [23] 2020 VR Education  Application  Archaeological  site HTC Vive 
Bekele et al. [24] 2019 MR Entertainment  Design & 
Development  Not speciﬁed  HoloLens  1 
Bekele et al. [25] 2021 MR Entertainment  Design & 
Development  Heritage  site HoloLens  
Bolognesi  et al. [26] 2020 VR Edutainment  Design & 
Development  Museum  Oculus Rift S 
Bozzelli et al. [27] 2019 VR Edutainment  Application  Museum  HTC Vive 
Bruno et al. [28] 2018 VR Accessibility  Application  Heritage  site HTC Vive 
Cai et al. [29] 2018 VR Education  Evaluation  Heritage  site HTC Vive 
Choromaáski  et al. [30] 2019 VR Education  Application  Museum  Oculus Rift 
Comes et al. [31] 2020 VR Education  Application  Archaeological  site HTC Vive 
Comes et al. [32] 2022 VR + AR Education  Design & 
Development  Archaeological  site Oculus Meta Quest + 
HoloLens  2 
De Paolis et al. [33] 2022 VR Accessibility  Application  Heritage  site Oculus Quest 2 
Debailleux  et al. [34] 2018 VR Guidance  Application  Historical  centre Oculus Rift  
Debandi et al. [35] 2018 MR Guidance  Application  Heritage  site HoloLens  
Drossis et al. [36] 2018 VR Education  Application  Heritage  site Oculus Rift 
Duer et al. [37] 2020 VR Accessibility  Application  Museum  Not speciﬁed  
Egea-Vivancos  et al. [38] 2020 VR Edutainment  Evaluation  Not speciﬁed  Oculus Rift + HTC Vive 
Errichiello  et al. [39] 2018 VR Proﬁlation  Application  Heritage  site Samsung  Oculus Gear 
VR 
Falconer  et al. [40] 2020 VR Entertainment  Application  Heritage  site Oculus Rift 
Galdieri et al. [41] 2019 VR Entertainment  Evaluation  Not speciﬁed  Not speciﬁed  
Geronikolakis  et al. [42] 2020 MR Edutainment  Design & 
Development  Heritage  site Not speciﬁed  
Hajirasouli  et al. [43] 2021 VR Accessibility  Evaluation  Heritage  site Oculus 
Häkkilä et  al. [44] 2019 VR Accessibility  Application  Museum  Oculus Rift 
Hammady  et al. [45] 2020 MR Edutainment  Design & 
Development  Museum  HoloLens  
Hammady  et al. [46] 2020 MR Guidance  Application  Museum  HoloLens  
Hammady  et al. [47] 2019 MR Guidance  Design & 
Development  Museum  HoloLens  
Hammady  et al. [48] 2021 MR Guidance  Evaluation  Museum  HoloLens  
Horäkovä et  al. [49] 2019 VR Entertainment  Application  Museum  HTC Vive 
Kaghat et al. [50] 2020 AR Guidance  Application  Museum  Not speciﬁed  
Kersten et al. [51] 2018 VR Guidance  Application  Museum  HTC Vive 
Krzywinska  et al. [52] 2020 MR Edutainment  Design & 
Development  Museum  HoloLens  
Kusajima  et al. [53] 2018 VR Entertainment  Application  Museum  Not speciﬁed  
Litvak et al. [54] 2020 AR Guidance  Application  Museum  Everysight  Raptor 
cycling 
Loaiza et al. [55] 2020 VR Education  Application  Museum  HTC Vive 
Masciotta  et al. [56] 2019 MR Management  Design & 
Development  Not speciﬁed  HoloLens  
McCarthy  et al. [57] 2019 VR Accessibility  Application  Heritage  site Not speciﬁed  
Obeidy et al. [58] 2018 AR Guidance  Application  Heritage  site Google Glass 
Parker et al. [59] 2019 VR Entertainment  Evaluation  Museum  Not speciﬁed  
Pehlivanides  et al. [60] 2020 VR Accessibility  Application  Heritage  site Oculus Rift S 
Pérez et al. [61] 2020 VR Accessibility  Application  Heritage  site Lenovo headset 
Petrelli et al. [62] 2019 VR Entertainment  Evaluation  Heritage  site Stereoscope  
Puig et al. [3] 2020 VR Education  Evaluation  Museum  HTC Vive 
Ragusa et al. [63] 2019 AR Proﬁlation  Design & 
Development  Heritage  site HoloLens  
Schoﬁeld  et al. [64] 2018 VR Education  Application  Museum  Stereoscope  
Secci 
et al. [65] 2019 VR Accessibility  Application  Heritage  site Oculus Rift 
Selmanovi  ´c et al. [66] 2020 VR Edutainment  Evaluation  Heritage  site Not speciﬁed  
Settembrini  et al. [67] 2018 VR Education  Application  Heritage  site Oculus DK2  
Sylaiou et al. [68] 2019 VR Guidance  Evaluation  Museum  Oculus Rift 
Tennent et al. [69] 2020 VR Entertainment  Application  Museum  HTC Vive 
Teruggi et al. [70] 2022 MR Management  Application  Heritage  site HoloLens  2 
( continued  on next page ) 
272 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
Table 1 ( continued  ) 
Authors Publication  
year XR 
Technology  Purpose Type of study Location Visualization  tool 
tom Dieck et al. [71] 2019 VR Entertainment  Evaluation  Museum  Samsung  Oculus Gear 
VR 
Trichopoulos  et al. [72] 2022 AR Accessibility  Application  Museum  HoloLens  2 
Trindade  et al. [73] 2018 VR Edutainment  Evaluation  Heritage  site HTC Vive 
Trindade  et al. [74] 2022 VR Edutainment  Evaluation  Heritage  site HTC Vive 
Trizio et al. [75] 2019 VR Accessibility  Design & 
Development  Heritage  site Oculus Rift 
Vlizos et al. [76] 2021 MR Education  Application  Archaeological  site HoloLens  2 
Yoo et al. [77] 2019 VR Entertainment  Application  Museum  Oculus 
Zerman et al. [78] 2020 MR Education  Evaluation  Museum  HoloLens  
Zhang et al. [79] 2021 VR Edutainment  Application  Heritage  site Oculus 
vironment  in which an artwork  was made or the space in which 
it is typically  shown,  so that the visitors  may have a stronger  con- 
nection  to the artwork  itself as a result of having a deeper  under- 
standing  of the meaning  and context  of the piece. This can enhance  
the learning  process,  providing  useful and engaging  information  to 
the visitor while observing  each work. 
Among  the contributions  describing  the creation  of immersive  
educational  material,  the visualization  of 3D data and virtual mod- 
els using a headset  is extremely  important  in sharing  and learn- 
ing about the history  of a place. The integration  of XR in 3D re- 
construction  is a very powerful  learning  tool. The digitization  of 
an existing  monument  [20,30]  , or the reconstruction  of a poorly 
preserved  structure  [31] , as well as the possibility  of interaction  
with virtual spaces and objects  contributes  to the promotion  of 
cultural  heritage  and improves  knowledge  of these sites by provok-  
ing critical  feedback  and increased  awareness.  However,  the devel- 
opment  of these applications  is often hampered  by misinterpre-  
tations  and archaeological  misunderstandings,  which need to be 
addressed  carefully  [23] . Furthermore,  full-quality  data and mea- 
surements  cannot be used directly  for visualization  due to the ac- 
tual limitations  of game engines  and hardware  processing  power, 
introducing  the need for additional  data preparation  processes  to 
achieve  a good compromise  between  easy-to-visualize  low polygon  
3D models  and optimal  reconstruction  accuracy.  
XR technology  can assist cultural  heritage  institutions  and mu- 
seums in preserving  and presenting  their collection  in novel and 
original  ways. With XR, visitors  can interact  with historical  arti- 
facts, explore  virtual environments,  and engage  with cultural  con- 
tent in ways that were previously  impossible.  For instance,  it of- 
fers the possibility  to manipulate  artifacts  up close, eliminating  
the physical  distance  between  the exposed  objects  and the visi- 
tor. Some examples  are the works of Drossis  et al. [36] and Set- 
tembrini  et al. [67] , whose virtual environments  allow people to 
interact  with virtual reproductions  of cultural  artifacts  and histor- 
ical objects,  and obtain information  through  gestural  interactions  
and eye and head movements.  Leap Motion  was employed  in both 
cases to track and animate  virtual hands, even though  tracking  in- 
stabilities  still occur due to occlusions  between  ﬁngers or palms. 
The public can hardly develop  a complete  understanding  of so- 
ciety only by artifacts  or archaeological  remains.  Thus, providing  
the context  can result of upmost  importance  not only to improve  
the visitors’  experience  in terms of attractiveness  but also to en- 
hance the comprehension  of the works’ intrinsic  meaning.  To this 
aim, Puig et al. [3] simulated  the Neolithic  settlement  of La Draga 
using a VR headset.  The experience  includes  a series of interac-  
tive and non-interactive  activities,  such as observing  ancient  arti- 
facts, experimenting  with the technique  of stone carving,  watching  
videos about the population,  customs,  and agricultural  activities,  
and a game to make participants  aware of the learning  about Ne- 
olithic society  during the exhibition.  
Cai et al. [29] also used a VR headset  to virtually  simulate  the 
daily life of the Ningbonese  population  in a 3D reconstruction  of characteristic  dwellings.  Their study showed  how VR reconstruc-  
tions of cultural  heritage  can trigger memories  and a sense of 
familiarity  in individuals  who are familiar  with the objects  and 
scenes.  A similar  educational  approach  was also adopted  by Vlizos 
et al. [76] , in which Microsoft  HoloLens  has been used to simulate  
an archaeological  excavation  of a trench layer by layer, providing,  
for each step of the process,  the information  needed  to understand  
its dynamics.  
Another  advantageous  feature  of these new technologies  con- 
sists in the opportunity  of creating  novel virtual exhibitions  by 
gathering  in the same place artworks  located  in different  museum  
spaces [55] , or temporarily  not on public display  due to restoration  
interventions  [32] ( Fig. 4 ). 
When used in an educational  setting,  XR technologies  allow to 
speed up the learning  process  by using a novel method  of knowl-  
edge transmission  that allows the learning  experience  to be tai- 
lored to a more modern  audience.  Future research  should focus 
on the management  of complex  information,  such as intangible  re- 
sources.  For these elements  of interest,  the contribution  provided  
by XR technologies  could be even more impactful,  since it is diﬃ- 
cult to convey  with other traditional  approaches,  resulting  in a less 
signiﬁcant  experience.  
4.2. Entertainment  
XR technologies  are an opportunity  for museums  because  they 
provide  the possibility  to offer many different  and immersive  ex- 
periences  using the same headset  that is adaptable  to different  en- 
vironments.  The use of headsets  in cultural  contexts  gives visitors  
the opportunity  to obtain fully interactive  and engaging  interpre-  
tations  of stories,  works of art, and archaeological  sites. 
Bekele et al. [25] proposed  a cloud-based  HoloLens  MR applica-  
tion that uses multi-user  collaborative  interaction  to enhance  the 
engaging  aspect of the learning  process.  The type of interaction  is 
map-based,  in which a walkable  MR Map is used as an interactive  
interface  to manipulate  3D models  of artifacts  in the virtual en- 
vironment  [24] . The authors  mentioned  some technical  challenges  
regarding  the computational  resources  required  for MR applica-  
tion development  with the HoloLens  devices;  these include  the use 
of constantly  updating  development  frameworks,  such as MRTK, 
which causes incompatibility  issues between  devices  and applica-  
tions versions,  or the use of additional  cloud-based  storage  to pre- 
vent the degradation  of device performance  due to the loading  of 
all content  at runtime.  
Falconer  et al. [40] developed  a VR simulation  of the Neolithic  
Avebury  Stone Circle and Henge complex  how it may have looked 
in 2300 BC. The multi-user  experience  was fully immersive,  as vis- 
itors received  visual and auditory  cues via 3D headsets  and haptic 
devices.  Two adult avatars  of a Neolithic  man and woman  accom-  
panied  visitors  as they explored  the virtual space. The engagement  
aspect was enhanced  by the possibility  of seeing other participants  
273 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
Fig. 4. Illustration  of a VR application  with education  purpose.  Snapshots  of the VR applications  while the user is interacting  with 3D scanned and 3D reconstructed  artifacts.  
Picture taken from Comes et al. [32] . 
simultaneously  present  in the simulation  and communicating  with 
them through  speech  or text. 
Horäkovä et  al. [49] reproduced  in VR the entire Computer  
Graphics,  one of the ﬁrst computer  art exhibitions,  staged in 
Czechoslovakia  in 1968, modeling  the movement  from the visitor’s  
perspective,  allowing  a virtual tour of the exhibition  and the pos- 
sibility of observing  the art objects  up close or from distance.  In 
a very similar  way, Tennent  et al. [69] replicated  the ﬁrst photo- 
graphic  exhibition  in the world in a room-scaled  application  based 
on VR, Tresholds.  Room-scaled  VR allows visitors  to physically  walk 
in the virtual environment:  in particular,  the real world matches  
the virtual environment  along the transverse  direction,  while the 
longitudinal  direction  of the virtual environment  is much greater  
so that only a portion  of the virtual environment  is physically  
walkable.  The shapes of the objects  in the virtual room exactly  
match the real ones, so by juxtaposing  the virtual objects  against  
the real ones, it is also possible  to provide  tactile feedback  to the 
visitor. Nevertheless,  matching  real and virtual objects  should be 
done as accurately  as possible,  yet the alignment  between  phys- 
ical and digital resources  is inevitably  susceptible  to human  er- 
ror, as human  calibration  is required  even in automated  systems.  
Careful  design of spaces,  both physical  and digital,  is necessary  to 
properly  delineate  their boundaries  and characteristics.  Yoo et al. 
[77] wanted  to reproduce  the same artwork  in VR, in different  
and unexpected  environments  for an art museum,  and measure  
the user’s reaction  to the different  settings.  Each environment  has 
its own mood and feeling,  and this was a perfect  collateral  ele- 
ment for an art museum  since art should arouse emotions.  Instead,  
Kusajima  et al. [53] proposed  that audiences  use their bodies to 
reproduce,  through  VR, ‘Yose-e’  works, a type of Japanese  ukiyo-e  
paintings  that creates  the illusion  of a single large person  or object 
composed  of many people or objects  assembled  together.  However,  
the dimension  of the space provided  for conducting  the experience  
placed some limitations  on the space available  for necessary  hard- 
ware equipment,  thus limiting  the experience  to a single user at a 
time. 
Digital environments  are employed  to engage  visitors  actively  
and emotionally,  offering  the public the opportunity  to integrate  
the knowledge  and experiences  offered  by the cultural  venue with 
their own. The use of XR technologies  can be a tool to encourage  
interaction  between  users during the cultural  experience  and stim- 
ulate the sharing  of the experience  itself. Given the diversity  of the 
target audience,  XR applications  should be designed  with appro- 
priate levels of diﬃculty;  this way, people from different  cultural  
backgrounds  can carry out the experience  in an engaging  environ-  
ment even in the absence  of explicit  instructions.  
4.3. Edutainment  
Edutainment  is a form of educational  entertainment,  i.e., aimed 
at promoting  learning  in a playful  and entertaining  context.  The introduction  of XR technologies  in cultural  frameworks  has fos- 
tered the development  of this concept,  and in this type of ap- 
plication,  it has expressed  its maximum  communicative  potential,  
bringing  a traditionally  distant  category  of users closer to cultural  
environments.  In this context,  Aiello et al. [16] developed  a com- 
plete workﬂow  involving  3D modeling,  attractive  storytelling,  and 
experiencing  VR through  an Oculus Rift device.  Storytelling  is core 
in an edutainment  application  since attractiveness  directly  impacts  
the user’s engagement  and, consequently,  the user’s learning  abil- 
ity. The developed  prototype,  Timeless  Museum,  uses VR to cre- 
ate an emotional  learning  experience  in which masterpieces  from 
all times, although  belonging  to different  cultural  institutions,  are 
brought  together  in the same place ( Fig. 5 ). 
The idea of edutainment  is the foundation  of serious  games,  
which are games aiming  to educate  while also entertaining.  There 
are numerous  examples  of VR-based  serious  games in the liter- 
ature. Anastasiovitis  et al. [17] proposed  three serious  games for 
Oculus as part of the Digiart  European  Union-funded  project:  the 
Scladina  cave in Belgium  is the subject  of the ﬁrst case study; the 
second  case study replicates  a digital anthropological  museum;  the 
Palace of Aigai in Greece  serves as the third case study’s  pub- 
lic interface.  Bolognesi  et al. [26] developed  a serious  game to 
promote  the Milanese  museum  Studio Museo Achille Castiglioni  
and introduce  the public to the works and genius of the mas- 
ter Castiglioni.  Bozzelli  et al. [27] proposed,  in the context  of the 
ArkaeVision  project,  ArkaeVision  Archeo,  an HMD VR-based  expe- 
rience that integrates  the 3D reconstruction  of the archaeological  
site of the temple  of Hera in Paestum;  the actual practicability  of 
this system  in terms of guides and operators,  however,  needs to 
be further  investigated,  since the demo considered  in this study 
was considered  too short by the participants  and there were some 
issues related  to motion  and locomotion  sickness.  Egea-Vivancos  
et al. [38] developed  a cooperative  historical  video game for learn- 
ing about the culture  and archaeological  contents  of Roman  the- 
atres. Zhang et al. [79] created  a VR game for promoting  the art 
and culture  of Dunhuang  grotto murals.  Selmanovi  ´c et al. [66] re- 
leased an educational  experience  and quiz sessions  on intangible  
bridge diving traditions  that, if correctly  answered,  gave access to 
a virtual bridge diving at Stari Most (Mostar  Bosnia).  Also, MR- 
based serious  games have been released:  Krzywinska  et al. [52] de- 
veloped  a co-designed  social escape room experience  to simu- 
late a World War II telegraph  exercise  using Microsoft  HoloLens,  
while Geronikolakis  et al. [42] simulated  the entire construction  of 
Knossos  and restoration  of Sponza,  creating  an MR-based  serious  
game to learn about the buildings  from within the archaeological  
site. 
Since the learning  ability depends  on users’ collaborative  partic- 
ipation  in the learning  process,  the interactive  features  of XR appli- 
cations  would be able to facilitate  active learning  increasing  users’ 
attention.  Nonetheless,  clear guidelines  need to be developed  on 
which features  of an XR environment  a designer  should focus on to 
274 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
Fig. 5. Example  of VR application  with edutainment  purpose.  Snapshot  of a scene of the VR application  presenting  a “dystopian  dimension”.  Figure is taken from Aiello et al. 
[16] . 
increase  user engagement  and improve  the learning  process  during 
the experience.  
4.4. Touristic  guidance  systems  
In recent years, XR technologies  have been gaining  ground  in 
the ﬁeld of cultural  heritage  as replacement  or assistance  systems  
for the role of human  guides within museums  and archaeological  
sites. Their ability to provide  additional  audio-visual  information  to 
visitors  makes them extremely  suitable  for this role, allowing  cus- 
tomers  to tour independently,  without  any temporal  and/or spatial 
constraints,  boosting  the time people spent in museums  and mak- 
ing the overall experience  more engaging.  
In this context,  Debandi  et al. [35] developed  a smart guide for 
outdoor  environments  that relies on an application  for HoloLens.  
Through  a client-server  application,  HoloLens  sends a continuous  
stream  of images  of what the visitor is looking  at. A remote  visual 
search engine processes  the received  images  by comparing  them 
with a database  and sends a feedback  signal if the observed  ob- 
ject is recognized.  In this way, the visitor is provided  with differ- 
ent augmented  virtual content  (such as 3D reproductions,  images,  
and videos,  textual  content,  etc.) depending  on what is observed.  
Nevertheless,  images  recognition  and tracking  with Vuforia  were 
discovered  to be unreliable  since both recognition  and tracking  can 
be hampered  by any change  in light or movement  of each object 
or user compared  to the images  uploaded  to the database.  
A similar  approach  for outdoor  guidance  systems  was also used 
by Litvak et al. [54] . Places and object recognition,  in this case, 
were realized  by employing  a localization  and orientation  system  
in which the coordinates  of POIs are recorded.  In the proximity  of 
a POI (5–6 m), the system  announces  its name and then provides  
all the available  information  to the visitor. A further  application  
of an outdoor  tourist guidance  system  is TouristicAR,  described  in 
the work of Obeidy  et al. [58] , which allows visitors  to explore  
Malaysia’s  UNESCO  cultural  heritage  by wearing  a Google  Glass 
equipped  with an internet  connection,  in which Google  Places API 
can work ( Fig. 6 ). 
A different  system,  Sound Augmented  Reality  Interface  for vis- 
iting Museum  (SARIM),  was proposed  by Kaghat  et al. [50] . The 
AR-based  audio system  is adaptive  and provides  cues, comments,  
and background  sound in the form of binaural  audio, depending  on 
the position  and behavior  of the visitor inside the museum  (focus, 
stop, movement),  and proximity  to artifacts.  In this way, each vis- 
itor’s path within the museum  is unique,  and the visit experience  
is customized  based on each behavior.  Similarly,  Debailleux  et al. 
[34] organized  a VR tour speciﬁcally  for children  with Oculus Rift 
in the main square of the city of Mons (Belgium)  to explore  the buildings  around  the square.  The VR tour is guided  by audio de- 
scriptions,  activated  when the user is in the vicinity  of a particular  
building.  The evaluation  results indicate  that although  children  also 
acquire  most tourist information  through  audio descriptions,  in the 
learning  phase visual knowledge  of buildings  and their architecture  
is more signiﬁcant  than historical  details.  
Kersten  et al. [51] proposed  a virtual reconstruction  of the 
wooden  model of the Temple  of Solomon,  which can be found in 
the Hamburg  Museum.  The virtual 3D model was uploaded  into a 
game engine to develop  a VR application  for the HTC Vive headset,  
in which the model could be scaled to the size of its real wooden  
counterpart,  or the actual size of the building  so that it could be 
visited virtually.  The application  offered  the opportunity  to orga- 
nize guided  virtual tours thanks to the multi-user  functionality,  
whereby  several  users could communicate  with each other during 
the virtual tour using a microphone.  
The MuseumEye  application  developed  by Hammady  et al. 
[46] introduces  the virtual avatar of Pharaoh  Tutankhamun  during 
a guided  tour of the Egyptian  museum  in Cairo for approximately  
30–40 min. The virtual guide accompanies  the visitor, equipped  
with HoloLens,  along a tour of the Tutankhamun  chamber  and 
stopped  at the predetermined  stations.  A holographic  user inter- 
face, speciﬁcally  designed  for the narrow  ﬁeld of view of HoloLens,  
allows the guest to engage  with the virtual replicas  of items in the 
museum  and observe  them up close [47] . The potential  role of the 
application  was evaluated  in Hammady  et al. [48] and proved  that 
the MR-based  guidance  system  can stimulate  the visitor to use it 
in the future. On the other hand, those evaluations  also revealed  
inherent  issues related  to the use of HoloLens  in overcrowded  
environments.  Speciﬁcally,  the complexity  of congested  corridors,  
rooms, and visiting  paths is diﬃcult  for HoloLens  to handle  with- 
out interrupting  the application  workﬂow.  
Argyriou  et al. [18] also employed  two virtual actors to develop  
a virtual tour in the historical  city center of the Greek city of 
Rethymno  ( Fig. 7 ). One was in charge of narration,  providing  in- 
formation  about the initial scene, and the other was used to direct 
the visitor to a particular  POI, providing  historical  information,  and 
motivating  the user to continue  the tour. The types of avatars  as 
tour guides in a museum  were evaluated  by Sylaiou  et al. [68] in 
a work in which three different  human  avatars  (a museum  curator,  
a security  guard, and a museum  visitor)  narrated  the same story 
about an artifact  with different  accents  and characteristics  depend-  
ing on the character.  The evaluation  showed  that the emotions  pro- 
voked in visitors  by the narratives  of the different  avatars  are dif- 
ferent; it is essential  that museum  curators  appropriately  design 
the type of virtual guides they want to employ,  depending  on the 
emotions  they want to arouse in their visitors.  
275 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
Fig. 6. Example  of XR application  with touristic guidance  purpose.  Snapshot  of the UI implementation  of the TouristicAR  app. Figure taken from Obeidy et al. [58] . 
Fig. 7. Example  of CH application  with touristic guidance  purpose.  Rethymno  360 ◦
immersive  video virtual tour scenes and design elements.  Figure taken from Ar- 
gyriou et al. [18] . 
The provisioning  of objective  and reliable  information  is an es- 
sential need for the use of XR systems  to supplement  or replace  
human  guides.  Extra caution  must be taken when planning  cul- 
tural itineraries  and deﬁning  factual historical  reconstructions  in 
order to prevent  misinterpretation  of information,  which can re- 
sult in misinformation  and have impacts  both on visitor learning  
and on the credibility  of the cultural  institution.  
4.5. Accessibility  
The term “accessibility” is  used in the literature  to indicate  the 
ability to make a cultural  heritage  content  or service  available  to 
the public without  distinction,  including  people with disabilities,  
who require  special  assistive  technologies.  However,  it is also used 
to indicate  the possibility  of easy access to a place, dependent  on 
factors such as the morphology  of the territory,  the care and clean- 
ing of the surrounding  environment,  and the conservation  status 
and preservation  policies  of heritage  sites. 
Regarding  applications  aimed at improving  the accessibility  of 
cultural  heritage  content  to users with disabilities,  an example  is 
given by Balbi et al. [19] . The design process  of a VR scenario  for the fruition  of cultural  content  also involved  users with motor dis- 
abilities,  in order to identify  all the basic requirements  for this type 
of application,  regarding  different  types of disabilities.  In this way, 
a VR solution  for cultural  heritage  was developed  according  to the 
principle  of User-Centered  Design (UCD), considering  the expecta-  
tions and needs of users with disabilities  from the beginning  of the 
design process,  and not only in the last stages of testing.  Another  
example  concerns  the development  of a VR application  for a vir- 
tual visit to the archaeological  site of Cancho  Roano, one of the 
most important  monuments  of protohistoric  Spain [61] . The vir- 
tual tour allows wheelchair  users to be able to virtually  visit the 
monument,  with the advantage  of avoiding  architectural  barriers  
that often slow down or prevent  access. Speciﬁcally,  visitors  have 
to wear a VR headset  integrated  with a motion  simulator  with a 
haptic interface.  This allowed  wheelchair  users to be able to ex- 
perience  real sensations,  such as the roughness  of the ground  and 
the inclination  of surfaces  under their wheelchair,  enhancing  the 
perceived  realism  of the experience.  
Trichopoulos  et al. [72] presented  the Cultural  Heritage  Aug- 
mented  and Tangible  Storytelling  (CHATS)  project,  an AR-based  
digital storytelling  system  without  the use of images,  in order to 
improve  the experience  of visually  impaired  visitors  in the heritage  
site. CHATS involves  the use of a tangible  interface  of a work of art 
(e.g., a 3D printed  representation  of the characters  in a painting).  
The physical  manipulation  of the interface  can activate,  depending  
on the user’s visual angle with respect  to the physical  artifact,  dig- 
ital storytelling  composed  of binaural  audio and augmented  con- 
tent provided  to the user through  a smart glass. In doing so, they 
exploit  HMD capabilities  to offer a fun and educational  way to 
browse  cultural  content.  
The VirtualDiver  project  proposed  by Pehlivanides  et al. [60] is 
one of the examples  where AR and VR have been used to create 
an immersive  platform  to allow visitors  to discover  the underwa-  
ter heritage  in the Greek sea and so increase  tourism  in this area. 
A particular  case study was realized  for the world-famous  island of 
Santorini  ( Fig. 8 (a)). The VR experience  allows the visitor to explore  
the island from virtual reconstructions  of the real environments  by 
simulating  a ﬂight from above ( Fig. 8 (b)), a walk through  the city 
center of Oia along a pre-determined  route ( Fig. 8 (c)), or an un- 
derwater  diving session  in the volcanic  crater where the island is 
located,  surrounded  by the characteristic  ﬂora and fauna ( Fig. 8 (d)). 
A VR application  developed  as part of the iMARECULTURE  project  
is an example  of the use of HMDs to bring the intrinsically  inac- 
276 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
Fig. 8. Example  of VR application  to enhance heritage site accessibility.  Pictures taken from Pehlivanides  et al. [60] . 
cessible  underwater  cultural  heritage  into the digital reach of the 
general  public [28] . People enrolled  in marine  and archaeology  will 
learn the fundamentals  of “site formation,” “surveying,” and  “exca- 
vation” through  the three components  of a serious  game developed  
for HTC Vive. The search and discovery  component  assessed  two 
maritime  archaeology  techniques  for ﬁnding  artifacts  [80] , the sec- 
ond one focuses  on documenting  an underwater  site by using a VR 
camera  to take images  that will later be used for photogrammetric  
analysis  [81] , while the third one emulates  the process  of excava-  
tion of the wreck by taking sand out of the seabed  [82] . 
The inaccessibility  of underwater  habitats  is frequently  caused  
by both the environment  itself and, in some circumstances,  restric-  
tions deriving  from the preservation  and protection  of underwater  
cultural  treasures.  A case is the shipwreck  of the Mercury,  which 
sank in 1822 during the Battle of Grado. After the discovery,  ex- 
cavations  were stopped  due to economic  reasons  and protection  
and conservation  of the archaeological  site, so that now the entire 
location  of the shipwreck  is completely  unreachable  because  it is 
submerged  by sand and the seabed.  The VR experience  proposed  
by Secci et al. [65] allows the visitor to simulate  a realistic  immer-  
sion in the shipwreck  site using an Oculus Rift VR headset,  start- 
ing from the water surface  to full immersion  on the seabed,  being 
able to visualize  the wreckage  thanks to photogrammetric  recon- 
structions  as found in the archaeological  excavations.  Another  ex- 
ample is the work of McCarthy  et al. [57] who replicated  a diving 
experience  for non-divers  to discover  Iceland’s  oldest shipwreck,  
the Melckmeyt,  which sank in 1659. The 2.5-D VR experience  in- 
cludes a 360-degree  panoramic  animated  video viewable  through  
a Samsung  Gear VR headset,  in which the relief of the wreck is re- 
placed with a speculative  reproduction  of the ship as it could have 
seemed  immediately  after the sinking,  allowing  visitors  to truly 
perceive  the shipwreck  as part of a large, now disappeared  ship. 
A similar  approach  has been used in the valorization  policies  
of isolated,  particularly  vulnerable  archaeological  sites and heritage  
places, which are considered  to be at risk due to the conditions  in 
which they are preserved  or the dangerousness  of their surround-  
ings [22,33,37,43,44,75]  . 
VR headsets  made it possible  to create frameworks  in which 
virtual reconstructions  of damaged  heritage  sites could be dis- 
played,  and the environment  and atmosphere  simulated  as accu- 
rately as possible,  without  affecting  the realism  of the entire expe- rience [44] . The high degree of immersivity  that these tools pro- 
vide makes it possible  to involve  a larger number  of people and 
create a high degree of participation  even for archaeological  sites 
in which interest  has been lost, or which cannot be restored,  pro- 
viding the continuation  of tourism  in complete  safety [22] . How- 
ever, the quality  of the user interface,  or rather the simplicity  of 
handling  the controllers,  as well as easy management  of the navi- 
gation system  of the virtual world are all factors that must be con- 
sidered  while developing  these apps. In order to reach an audi- 
ence as wider as possible,  these systems  should be simple to use 
for all users with little or no acquaintance  with these technolo-  
gies, such as children  or the elderly,  even though  it is generally  ac- 
knowledged  that younger  adults are more interested  in using them 
[44] . 
4.6. Visitor proﬁling  
AR and VR HMD-based  applications  have become  popular  in 
museums  and cultural  sites also as visitor proﬁling  tools. These de- 
vices can provide  useful insights  into the perceptions  of guests of a 
cultural  site and can collect important  data with the aim of proﬁl- 
ing tourists.  This would allow cultural  sites to provide  their visitors  
with diversiﬁed  and customized  content,  suggest  a preferred  visit 
route, and increase  the enjoyment  of cultural  content,  enhancing  
the overall experience.  
Ragusa  et al. [63] developed  a system  based on a HoloLens  ap- 
plication  that can assist a tourist during a visit. The HMD pro- 
vides the visitor with additional  cultural  content  through  holo- 
grams, and, in addition,  is capable  of keeping  track of important  
data, such as the user’s location  within the museum,  the arti- 
facts that have already  been viewed,  and the time spent in front 
of each work. The study of the data collected  from each visitor 
can provide  important  information  on visitors’  behavior  and prefer- 
ences, assess which locations  are preferred  by users, and organize  
more appropriate  guidance  paths. A further  function  might involve  
tracking  which cultural  artifacts  are mostly observed  by tourists,  
providing  additional  insights  into visitors’  preferences.  Errichiello  
et al. [39] analyzed  data collected  from 287 interviews  to assess 
the level of attraction  of the “San Teodoro  Experience” project  and 
its VR-based  experience  prior to its inauguration  and opening.  A 
cluster analysis  was performed  in order to proﬁle the visitors  and 
277 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
Fig. 9. Example  of MR application  for cultural heritage sites management.  The pictures refer to a project regarding  Bologna porticoes  taken from Teruggi et al. [70] . 
to verify whether  socio-demographic  differences  and emotional  re- 
sponses  modiﬁed  the perception  of the VR experience  as a whole. 
The three clusters  of visitors  obtained  showed  differences  in the 
perception  of VR, with a more positive  emotional  response  for the 
VR-enthusiasts  cluster.  
These ﬁndings  demonstrate  how it is possible  to provide  visi- 
tors with cultural  experiences  tailored  to their features  and pref- 
erences,  and enhance  their emotional  reactions  through  VR tools. 
Nevertheless,  the main drawback  of these studies  is the poor com- 
position  and small size of the samples  used to collect data and per- 
form statistical  analysis.  Indeed,  these studies  must be expanded  to 
include  additional  museums  and heritage  sites in order to cross- 
validate  the ﬁndings  to enable more extensive  generalizations.  
4.7. Cultural  heritage  site management  
Preservation,  monitoring,  and preventive  maintenance  of cul- 
tural and historical  heritage  require  a complicated  decision-making  
process  and the personal  involvement  of owners  and curators.  Of 
paramount  importance  is the process  of constantly  updating  the 
documentation  of cultural  heritage  so that it is easily accessible  
and consultable  by everyone.  
The HeritageCare  project,  described  in the study by Masciotta  
et al. [56] , presents  a MR-based  methodology  for the creation  of a 
protocol  for the inspection  of cultural  heritage  and the digitization  
of documentation  and its related  information.  Using a HoloLens,  
inspectors  have access to the virtual model of a heritage  site, re- 
trieve the corresponding  technical  information  such as data from 
previous  inspections,  or update  it with new measurements.  In ad- 
dition, the protocol  integrates  common  documentation  and classi- 
ﬁcation  criteria  for condition  and risk analysis  to provide  an objec- 
tive evaluation  of the current  state of cultural  heritage  conserva-  
tion. Teruggi  et al. [70] presented  three case studies  (the Temple  
of Neptune  in Paestum,  the Milan Cathedral,  and Bologna’s  porti- 
coes) for the application  of a framework  for the management  of 
large 3D point cloud data ( Fig. 9 ). The use of an HMD device al- 
lows the high-resolution  visualization  of these data in full, or by 
segmenting  entire building  blocks or individual  architectural  ele- 
ments, and then inspecting  them in close detail. This application  
has implications  both in the ﬁeld of tourist guides,  e.g., by posi- 
tioning  information  hotspots  in crucial locations  and in the context  
of maintenance  interventions.  
Clear and consistent  documentation  and monitoring  procedures  
provide  the basis for the protection  of cultural  heritage.  Indeed,  
major problems  with classiﬁcation,  integration,  administration,  and 
access may arise as a result of the signiﬁcant  quantity  of hetero-  
geneous  information  and data collected  for each item. These tech- 
nologies  can therefore  have a huge impact  on the categorisation,  
analysis,  and traceability  of the high volume  of data from different  
inspection  and diagnostic  approaches.  These aspects  will be dis- 
cussed in the next Section.  5. Discussion  
The concept  of “cultural  heritage  site” has  evolved  signiﬁcantly  
over time. Whereas  previously  cultural  sites represented  static 
warehouses  to acquire,  preserve,  conserve,  and study artifacts,  
their mission  has now changed.  People today consider  cultural  
sites as active learning  environments,  where the importance  of ob- 
jects is questioned  in favor of the importance  of information  [83] . 
The entire cultural  experience  is now designed  in a user-centric  
manner:  every aspect of the offered  experience  and activities  must 
contribute  to the visitor’s  satisfaction  and the advancement  of the 
visitor’s  knowledge.  
The use of digital technologies  like AR, MR, and VR offers new 
forms of learning,  makes knowledge  and works accessible,  and al- 
lows the visitor to personalize  the visit; the development  of XR se- 
rious games engages  new audiences,  traditionally  far from cultural  
environments,  thanks to the type of interaction  and the familiar-  
ity of the storytelling,  facilitating  their learning  in an edutainment  
key using the “learning  by doing” paradigm.  On the management  
side, the use of these technologies  allows for better analysis,  pro- 
ﬁling, and management  of the general  public. The direct conse- 
quence  of these considerations  is the creation  of more attractive  
visitor routes based on guests’  preferences.  
All these concepts  reach their maximum  expression  in the use 
of immersive  devices,  such as AR HMDs, VR headsets,  and CAVE 
systems.  These immersive  technologies  allow a controlled  explo- 
ration of the environment  and the presentation  of information  
with greater  depth and breadth.  This method  of presenting  cultural  
content  encourages  psychological  immersion  and a sense of pres- 
ence, both of which increase  engagement  and make visitors  more 
prone to knowledge  awareness.  
Results  from Table 1 were statistically  analyzed  to respond  to 
RQ1, and the results are shown in Fig. 3 . Furthermore,  our ﬁrst re- 
search question  was answered  above and discussed  in Section  4 . 
Section  5.1 speciﬁcally  focuses  on the advantages  of XR headset-  
based versus handheld  XR-based  applications  in order to answer  
RQ2, while Sections  5.2 and 5.3 answer  RQ3, discussing  the issues 
encountered  by authors  in the employment  of such technologies  in 
the cultural  heritage  domain  both from the designer  and the user 
perspective.  
5.1. Advantages  and limitations  over handheld  devices  
Handheld  devices  dominate  the broad landscape  of XR-based  
applications  for the cultural  heritage  domain  [84] . This is not sur- 
prising  given that cultural  heritage  XR applications  are mainly  
based on the “Bring Your Own Device” (BYOD)  concept  [84,85]  , 
which is the policy that allows people to use their personal  de- 
vices during the cultural  experience.  Indeed,  visitors  interact  with 
their own devices  more intuitively  and familiarly,  and some de- 
vices may already  be optimized  to increase  accessibility  for peo- 
ple with special  needs [54] . Therefore,  the aim of many cultural  
278 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
sites is to develop  solutions  with high-quality  cultural  content  in 
which visitors  use their own devices,  whose portability  is suitable  
for visiting  cultural  sites, for instance  using their camera  to point 
in a direction  while interacting  with the touch screen [85] . This 
is unquestionably  advantageous,  as, by implementing  this policy, 
cultural  institutions  avoid providing  for a variety  of tasks such as 
renting  or purchasing  equipment,  dedicating  storage  space for it, 
keeping  the equipment  charged  and in proper condition,  updating  
content  and software,  and training  and paying staff to  assist visi- 
tors during experiences  and ensure security  [84] . 
However,  handheld  devices  are now regarded  as too common  
and are not considered  an attraction  for visitors  as they now rep- 
resent the everyday  rather than the exceptional.  While handheld  
devices,  such as smartphones  and tablets are more accessible  and 
less expensive,  they can distract  visitors  from the exhibition  to the 
point of completely  disconnecting  them from the visit [54] . It can 
be tiring to hold a smartphone  during a visit, and the nature of the 
interaction,  which is conﬁned  within the boundaries  of the screen,  
increases  the distance  between  the visitor and the exhibition,  re- 
sulting  in less immersiveness  [27,54,62,78]  . Furthermore,  the accu- 
racy with which they track objects  and artifacts  is not high [11] . 
Museum  curators  and cultural  site managers  exploit  the ap- 
pealing  potential  of interactive  XR installations  and technological  
devices  to attract new users, intrigued  by the new multimedia  
medium.  The use of HMDs could be a valuable  solution,  offering  
museum  visitors  a more natural  and intuitive  means of interaction  
without  the need to carry a device,  as well as an uninterrupted  ex- 
perience  with no need to switch attention  between  the screen and 
the exhibition  [86] . Recent research  has compared  the impressions  
produced  by handheld  devices  to those produced  by more immer-  
sive devices,  such as headsets  and CAVE systems.  When compared  
to a handheld  device,  headsets  provide  a more immersive  and ap- 
pealing  experience  to the user. The combined  effect of storytelling  
and the real surroundings  captivated  visitors’  interest  and commit-  
ment to further  explore  that environment,  resulting  in an educa- 
tional and valuable  tourism  experience  [27] . 
In terms of emotion,  the use of headsets  allows users to feel 
completely  immersed  in the virtual scenario  and emotionally  in- 
volved in the story. It is common  for evaluations  of XR applica-  
tions for cultural  heritage  that use headsets  to report that almost 
all users felt an increased  sense of presence.  The virtual scenes’  
colors, sounds,  and styles aid in recreating  the global atmosphere  
and transporting  them to another  world. Also, some authors  ﬁnd 
out that users who wear HMDs dedicate  more time to the explo- 
ration of their surroundings  and in the interaction  with the objects  
they see [46] . 
The ability of many HMDs to perform  eye tracking  and head 
tracking  can provide  important  data on the orientation  and posi- 
tion of the head and gaze, and thus conﬁrm  the user’s direction  of 
interest  [47] . This facilitates  the development  and design of more 
engaging  and personalized  visitor experiences  and paths, based on 
what each visitor ﬁnds most attractive  and interesting.  
5.2. Task-speciﬁc  design and development  issues 
Although  immersive  technology  based on headsets  and HMDs 
shows considerable  potential  when applied  to cultural  heritage  ap- 
plications,  some researchers  have indicated  some important  limita- 
tions. This Section  focuses  on design and development  perspective.  
It is well known  that any cultural  heritage  revitalization  project  
should integrate  the reconstruction  of historical  traces and archae-  
ological  remains  of the cultural  site of interest.  The virtual recon- 
struction  and data digitization  should preserve  the authenticity  of 
the original  site or artifact  in order to obtain a true and cred- 
ible model. While artifacts  and archaeological  remains  can pro- 
vide valuable  insights  into past societies,  they alone cannot pro- vide a complete  understanding  of the individuals,  social, economic,  
and political  contexts  that inﬂuenced  their realization.  A multi- 
disciplinary  approach  integrating  humanistic,  scientiﬁc,  and tech- 
nical knowledge  is core to develop  a solution  capable  to provide  
a comprehensive  understanding  of a society’s  history  and culture.  
This highlights  the importance  of gathering  multiple  sources  of in- 
formation,  including  historical  records,  ethnographic  accounts,  and 
oral histories.  The undeniable  advantage  of dealing  with a plethora  
of information  has a counterpart;  indeed,  the heterogeneity  of data 
sources  makes it challenging  to face all the following  steps: image 
acquisition,  view registration,  mesh integration  and texture  genera-  
tion [87] . To address  these challenges,  it is essential  to have a clear 
understanding  of the depth sensing  devices,  the data sources,  and 
their limitations,  as well as the context  and purpose  of the applica-  
tion. In this sense, involving  experts  from different  disciplines,  such 
as archaeology,  history,  and computer  science,  becomes  mandatory  
to ensure the accuracy  and authenticity  of virtual models  and en- 
hance the user experience.  
The reconstruction  process  should aim to recreate  the site or 
artifact  as accurately  as possible,  while still being mindful  of the 
limitations  of available  data and the need to make informed  as- 
sumptions.  For those developing  immersive  applications  dedicated  
to cultural  heritage,  these issues could be even more challeng-  
ing, since the reconstruction  accuracy  determines  the realism  of 
the experience  and, consequently,  its attractiveness  and usefulness.  
Producing  high-quality  visualizations  to impart complex  histori-  
cal knowledge  during a cultural  heritage  visit is highly demand-  
ing to such a point that it is often inevitable  to ﬁnd a trade-off
between  the reconstruction  quality  and eﬃcient  computation  [88] . 
Data availability  is a required  feature  to make virtual objects,  en- 
vironments,  or scenarios  from the past presented  in VR as realis- 
tic as possible.  When available,  the artworks  can be 3D scanned  
or there could be the need of totally or partially  reconstruct  them 
thanks to the variety  of tools and processes  for 3D data collecting  
[87] . The type and the size of the artwork  and the goal of its dig- 
italization  determine  the best piece of equipment  to use in order 
to obtain the integration  of the original  data into a single mesh 
avoiding  information  loss, unwanted  gaps, or artifacts  [62] . More- 
over, the aesthetic  impact  of 3D models  is enhanced  by exact color 
data, which may also contain  crucial information  that should be 
retained,  making  texture  management  a key task [23] . 
There are numerous  methods  and workﬂows  proposed  in the 
literature  regarding  the reconstruction  of artifacts,  buildings,  and 
archaeological  remains  for their revitalization  and enhancement  
[16,23,32,43,65]  . However,  in most projects,  optimal  and detailed  
models  reconstruction  still struggles  with computing  power and 
limitations  of game engines  and headsets:  the need to obtain de- 
tailed meshes  produces  large polygonal  datasets,  which are diﬃcult  
to handle  for real-time  visualization,  actually  limiting  the complex-  
ity and details of the designed  virtual environments  [30,34,57,61]  . 
Most of the reviewed  research  requires  laborious  procedures  
for tracking  and spatial registration  between  artifacts  and the XR 
system.  Registration  allows computer-generated  objects,  such as 
replicas  of 3D models  and overlaid  information,  to be superim-  
posed and placed in a predeﬁned  position  with respect  to the real 
world. Therefore,  especially  when talking  of MR and AR applica-  
tions, matching  information  from the physical  world with informa-  
tion from the immersive  environment  is one of the major prob- 
lems to be addressed  [89] . In fact, since the user interacts  with 
the merged  visualization  as the ﬁnal product,  researchers  should 
be able to create systems  in which actual and augmented  objects  
are virtually  indistinguishable  from both a geometrical  and a pho- 
tometric  perspective  [90] . Moreover,  information  obtained  from the 
external  surroundings  should assist the user to explore  even more 
deeply the XR environment  [3] . Similarly,  virtual environment  in- 
formation  could assist users in learning  about related  tourist ob- 
279 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
jects or situations.  In connection  with this, feedback  on the visi- 
tor’s actions  must be provided,  as the absence  of feedback  from 
the application  may cause uncertainty  and a lower proclivity  to 
continue  using it. Shading  and lighting,  management  of reﬂections,  
occlusions,  and sizing virtual objects  are all issues related  to in- 
correct  registration  and positioning  of augmented  objects  in the 
virtual setting,  especially  when the employed  algorithms  deal only 
with color information,  instead  of also considering  the depth data. 
Following  registration,  tracking  techniques  enable the projected  
virtual item to hold onto its proper position  while gradually  re- 
sponding  to human  or 3D space movements.  Researchers  employed  
a variety  of tracking  methods  depending  on the kind of solutions  
they were developing.  When it comes to VR applications,  most 
researchers  used an inside-out  tracking  technique  that makes di- 
rect use of the camera  and sensors  in the headset  being used 
[16,21,22,24–26,33,49]  . By observing  the entire environment,  the 
position  of the headset  and controllers  relative  to the real world 
can be accurately  determined  through  the camera.  This allows the 
user to physically  navigate  the virtual world and even wander  
around  the room if there is suﬃcient  space (room-scale  experi-  
ences),  interacting  directly  with virtual objects  to further  increase  
the sense of immersion  in the VR environment.  
The problem  worsens,  though,  when it comes to MR and AR ap- 
plications.  In these applications,  knowing  the spatiotemporal  links 
between  the real and virtual worlds is therefore  crucial for en- 
abling the proper integration  of virtual models  with real-world  
objects  [2] . In order to achieve  a proper alignment  between  the 
actual world and the virtual information,  a fast and precise  esti- 
mation  of the visualization  location  with respect  to real objects  
must be achieved  [91] . Today, many tracking-based  systems  have 
been developed  and are commercially  available,  including  ther- 
mal imaging,  GPS, ultrasound,  magnetic  sensors,  optical sensors,  
and motion  sensors  [92] . For these purposes,  researchers  choose  
to rely on more robust external  tracking  systems  [50,52]  , equip- 
ping the HMD devices  with other sensors  or motion  capture  sys- 
tems such as Leap Motion  or Microsoft  Kinect.  However,  this fre- 
quently  results in a restriction  of the space available  for the ex- 
perience,  because  it becomes  challenging  to install large-scale  sys- 
tems and, also, allow multiple  users to play simultaneously  [53] . 
Another  choice has been to use computer  vision technologies  such 
as the Vuforia  Engine Library  [32,35,72]  ; this approach  allows the 
creation  of MR experiences  that interact  with both the objects  and 
the environment.  However,  tracking  instability  issues still persist,  
as image recognition  can vary among  tests as environmental  condi- 
tions change  [35] . To provide  robustness  even within widely vary- 
ing environments  both markerless  and marker-based,  XR tracking  
must take into account  the brightness  of the environment  as well 
as the angle at which the camera  is facing the marker,  image, or 
object [24,35,36]  . 
To retrieve  data from the server, many XR headset-based  appli- 
cations  require  an Internet  connection,  which is not always avail- 
able in all cultural  heritage  areas and sites. Other studies  highlight  
the disadvantages  of headsets  in terms of battery  life [69] and de- 
vice cost [46] . Furthermore,  not all heritage  sites and museums  
have large enough  spaces to accommodate  the XR experience.  This 
represents  a limitation,  necessitating  the use of stratagems  such 
as exploring  the virtual space only with controllers  or creating  re- 
stricted  play spaces [21,53] . 
5.3. User-related  issues 
One of the greatest  challenges  identiﬁed  in the ﬁeld of cultural  
heritage  is user involvement.  Several  usability  studies  investigating  
the individual  experiences  of visitors  who encountered  XR solu- 
tions in exhibitions,  museums,  and heritage  sites were carried  out 
with a focus on how the users interacted  with the headset  and the environment  prepared  for the XR experience.  The characteristics  
that researchers  have mostly focused  on concern  user experience  
usefulness  in the context  of interest,  ease of use of controllers  and 
interfaces,  and perceived  enjoyment.  Overall,  the papers reported  
positive  opinions  of visitors  toward  the conducted  XR experience,  
acknowledging  the educational  usefulness  and immersive  aspect of 
using headsets  during the visit [18,23,40]  . In addition,  a predispo-  
sition to use these technologies  regardless  of the age of the visitors  
and their previous  experience  with XR technologies  was reported,  
as well as requests  to perform  the experience  again or in a differ- 
ent or extended  version  [39,44]  . These outcomes  highlight  that the 
use of HMDs ﬁnds fertile ground  in the ﬁeld of cultural  heritage,  
as it manifests  itself as a useful tool for educating,  communicating  
a message,  and bringing  people closer to culture  and art appre- 
ciation.  Researchers  found that visitors  perceived  a greater  sense 
of presence  and immersion  in visits that involved  the use of XR 
technologies  and that they further  increased  if the visual stimu- 
lus was accompanied  by additional  sensory  stimuli,  such as tactile 
and auditory  stimuli  [69] . The usage of tangible  interfaces,  where 
physical  and virtual representations  are perceptually  coupled,  has 
the potential  to return the tactile feedback  to the user naturally,  
reﬂecting  the effects of manipulation  on the virtual level, and con- 
sequently  increasing  the realism  of interaction.  A deeper  under- 
standing  of the information  on the exhibit  can also be facilitated  
by visitors  physically  interacting  with museum  artifacts.  However,  
developers  must guarantee  that the pace at which information  is 
given in a particular  moment  is not overloaded  and keeps the vis- 
itor focused  on the experience.  
An aspect to be considered  with regard to the sense of pres- 
ence is the realism  of the reconstruction,  both from the cultural-  
historical  point of view and from that one of high ﬁdelity  in the 
reproduction  of artifacts.  In fact, the wealth  of details in the simu- 
lations is much appreciated  by the audience  and contributes  to the 
overall sense of immersion  within the experience,  conﬁrming  that 
high ﬁdelity  in the reproduction  of places and artifacts  is a fun- 
damental  requirement,  especially  when considering  artifacts  and 
details with which the user has to interact  in a direct way and 
therefore  should be visualized  closely  [33] . 
Another  factor to consider  is familiarity  with the device.  Cul- 
tural venues  provide  many users with the opportunity  to try out 
new technology  devices  such as headsets  and smart glasses  for 
the ﬁrst time. This may result in the lengthening  of the expected  
time span for the experience,  and longer waiting  times for visitors  
[3] . Furthermore,  there is still a strong commitment  to the con- 
ventional  notion of a museum,  which comprises  exposition  rooms 
intended  as works of art containers,  in the modern  socio-cultural  
framework  [16] . Even if generally  accepted  by the public, research  
on these applications  demonstrates  that highly educated  people 
have a superior  understanding  of how to use new technologies  to 
promote  culture  [16] , since they are more aware of the XR poten- 
tial and, as a result, more prepared  to reject the conventions  es- 
tablished  by traditional  museums  and adopt novel strategies  for 
presenting  the information.  In this sense, the application  layout 
can inﬂuence  the perception  of the user experience.  Indeed,  an 
unintuitive  layout can negatively  affect the user’s concentration  
and worsen  the virtual environment  exploration.  In order to satisfy 
users with little to no expertise  and who may come from a variety  
of backgrounds,  researchers  must assure a high level of usability  of 
their applications.  This requirement  is made much more relevant  
when considering  that usually  no prior training  in the use of XR 
technologies  is offered,  in contrast  to other ﬁelds like healthcare,  
industry,  and military  training.  
A further  issue with headset-based  applications  is that they are 
typically  single-user  experiences  [59] . Again, this can result in long 
waits and force visitors  to queue to try out the experience  espe- 
cially during peak times [53] . It may be beneﬁcial  to design wait- 
280 
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
ing areas in which visitors  are partially  stimulated  while queuing  
and partially  prepared  for the experience  ahead of them, with a 
brief training  on how to use the application  [69] . 
Finally,  the employment  of XR technology  in the ﬁeld of cultural  
heritage  raises privacy  issues for users. The advantage  of context-  
aware systems  or content  personalization  is that they present  the 
user with more pertinent  content.  The chance  that these data may 
be lost or exploited  increases  as the system  asks for more personal  
information  about the user. For this reason,  adequate  security  mea- 
sures must be adopted  to preserve  the user’s privacy,  for instance  
following  the indications  provided  by the General  Data Protection  
Regulation  (GDPR).  
6. Conclusions  
There has been increasing  interest  in the use of immersive  real- 
ity technologies  in the ﬁeld of cultural  heritage.  This research  con- 
tributes  to the development  and inclusion  of AR, MR, and VR ap- 
plications  by providing  an overview  and analysis  of relevant  stud- 
ies using fully immersive  systems,  such as headsets  and CAVE sys- 
tems, for solutions  in the cultural  heritage  domain.  Speciﬁcally,  a 
lot of authors  assessed  the use of HMDs, headsets,  and CAVE sys- 
tems, emphasizing  the advantages  that they bring to the cultural  
heritage  domain  applications  when compared  to handheld  devices,  
such as smartphones,  tablets,  and 2D monitors.  
The effective  use of these immersive  systems  in the cultural  
heritage  ﬁeld requires  the development  of customized  technologies  
and product  strategies  that allows visitors  to feel fully immersed  
and present  in the virtual environment,  allowing  for an engaging  
and educational  cultural  experience  that can enhance  the quality  
and learning  purposes  of cultural  visits. 
By resolving  issues through  ongoing  technological  development,  
such as performance  and computing  power enhancement,  design 
and interface  implementation,  battery  life extension,  and security  
improvements,  more reliable  and effective  use will be feasible  in 
the future. 
Funding  
This research  did not receive  any speciﬁc  grant from funding  
agencies  in the public, commercial,  or not-for-proﬁt  sectors.  
References  
[1] V. Okanovic,  I. Ivkovic-Kihic,  D. Boskovic,  B. Mijatovic,  I. Prazina, E. Skaljo, 
S. Rizvic, Interaction  in extended  reality applications  for cultural heritage,  
Appl. Sci. 12 (3) (2022) 1241 . 
[2] C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos, E. Vezzetti,  Augmented  reality: mapping  meth- 
ods and tools for enhancing  the human role in healthcare  HMI, Appl. Sci. 12 
(9) (2022) 4295 . 
[3] A. Puig, I. Rodríguez,  J.L. Arcos, A. Juan, Rodríguez-Aguilar,  S. Cebrián, A. Bog- 
danovych,  N. Morera, A. Palomo, R. Piqué, Lessons learned from supplementing  
archaeological  museum  exhibitions  with virtual reality, Virtual Real. 24 (2019) 
343–358  . 
[4] Y. Zhou, J. Chen, M. Wang, A meta-analytic  review on incorporating  virtual and 
augmented  reality in museum  learning,  Educ. Res. Rev. 36 (2022) 100454 . 
[5] N. Dozio, F. Marcolin,  G. Scurati, F. Nonis, L. Ulrich, E. Vezzetti,  F. Ferrise, De- 
velopment  of an affective database  made of interactive  virtual environments,  
Sci. Rep. 11 (2021) 12 . 
[6] F. Marcolin,  G.W. Scurati, L. Ulrich, F. Nonis, E. Vezzetti,  N. Dozio, F. Ferrise, 
Affective  virtual reality: how to design artiﬁcial experiences  impacting  human 
emotions,  IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 41 (6) (2021) 171–178 . 
[7] C. Innocente,  P. Piazzolla,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos, S. Tornincasa,  E. Vezzetti,  Mixed 
reality-based  support for total hip arthroplasty  assessment,  in: S. Gerbino, 
A. Lanzotti,  M. Martorelli,  R.M. Buil, C. Rizzi, L. Roucoules  (Eds.), Advances  on 
Mechanics,  Design Engineering  and Manufacturing  IV, Springer International  
Publishing,  Cham, 2023, pp. 159–169 . 
[8] C. Piramide,  L. Ulrich, P. Piazzolla,  E. Vezzetti,  Toward supporting  maxillo-facial  
surgical guides positioning  with mixed reality—A  preliminary  study, Appl. Sci. 
12 (16) (2022) 8154 . 
[9] J. Carmigniani,  B. Furht, M. Anisetti, P. Ceravolo,  E. Damiani,  M. Ivkovic, Aug- 
mented reality technologies,  systems and applications,  Multimed.  Tools Appl. 
51 (2010) 341–377 . [10] X. Gao, H. An, W. Chen, Z. Pan, A survey on mobile augmented  reality visual- 
ization, J. Computer-Aided  Des. Comput. Graph. 30 (1) (2018) 1–8 . 01 
[11] C. Wang, Y. Zhu, A survey of museum  applied research based on mobile aug- 
mented reality, Comput. Intell. Neurosci.  2022 (2022) 1–22 . 08 
[12] D.-I.D. Han, M.C.T. Dieck, T. Jung, Augmented  reality smart glasses (ARSG) vis- 
itor adoption  in cultural tourism, Leis. Stud. 38 (5) (2019) 618–633 . 
[13] C. Teeng, C.K. Lim, A. Raﬁ, K. Tan, M. Mokhtar,  Comprehensive  systematic  re- 
view on virtual reality for cultural heritage practices:  coherent  taxonomy  and 
motivations,  Multimed.  Syst. 28 (2022) 711–726 . 06 
[14] B.A. Kitchenham,  D. Budgen, P. Brereton,  Evidence-Based  Software  Engineering  
and Systematic  Reviews,  CRC Press, 2015 . 4 
[15] D.L. Weed, Weight of evidence:  a review of concept and methods,  Risk Anal. 
25 (6) (2005) 1545–1557  . 
[16] D. Aiello, S. Fai, C. Santagati,  Virtual museums  as a means for promotion  
and enhancement  of cultural heritage,  in: ISPRS - International  Archives of 
the Photogrammetry,  Remote Sensing and Spatial Information  Sciences,  vol. 
XLII-2/W15,  2019, pp. 33–40 . 08 
[17] E. Anastasovitis,  D. Ververidis,  S. Nikolopoulos,  I. Kompatsiaris,  Digiart: build- 
ing new 3D cultural heritage worlds, in: 2017 3DTV Conference:  The True 
Vision - Capture, Transmission  and Display of 3D Video (3DTV-CON),  2017, 
pp. 1–4 . 
[18] L. Argyriou,  D. Economou,  V. Bouki, Design methodology  for 360 ◦immersive  
video applications:  the case study of a cultural heritage virtual tour, Pers. 
Ubiquitous  Comput. 24 (2020) 843–859  . 12 
[19] B. Balbi, A. Marasco,  Co-designing  cultural heritage experiences  for all with 
virtual reality: a scenario-based  design approach,  Umanistica  Digit. (11) (2021) 
71–98 . 1 
[20] F. Banﬁ, C.M. Bolognesi,  Virtual reality for cultural heritage:  new levels of com- 
puter-generated  simulation  of a unesco world heritage site, in: C. Bolognesi,  
D. Villa (Eds.), From Building Information  Modelling  to Mixed Reality, Springer 
International  Publishing,  Cham, 2021, pp. 47–64 . 
[21] F.B. Rahimi, J. Boyd, J. Eiserman,  R. Levy, B. Kim, Museum  beyond physical 
walls: an exploration  of virtual reality-enhanced  experience  in an exhibition–
like space, Virtual Real. 26 (4) (2022) 1471–1488  . 03 
[22] R. Barbera, F. Condorelli,  G.D. Gregorio,  G.D. Piazza, M. Farella, G.L. Bosco, 
A. Megvinov,  D. Pirrone, D. Schicchi,  A. Zora, A case study for the design and 
implementation  of immersive  experiences  in support of sicilian cultural her- 
itage, in: P.L. Mazzeo, E. Frontoni,  S. Sclaroff, C. Distante (Eds.), Image Analy- 
sis and Processing.  ICIAP 2022 Workshops,  Springer International  Publishing,  
Cham, 2022, pp. 174–185 . 
[23] J.-B. Barreau, E. Esnault, J. Foucher, M. Six, C.L. Faou, 3D modelling  of a 15th 
century city gate of Rennes: portes mordelaises,  Virtual Archaeol.  Rev. 11 (22) 
(2020) 41–55 . 1 
[24] M.K. Bekele, Walkable  mixed reality map as interaction  interface  for virtual 
heritage,  Digit. Appl. Archaeol.  Cult. Herit. 15 (2019) e00127 . 
[25] M.K. Bekele, Clouds-based  collaborative  and multi-modal  mixed reality for vir- 
tual heritage,  Heritage 4 (3) (2021) 1447–1459  . 
[26] C. Bolognesi,  D. Aiello, Learning  through serious games: a digital design mu- 
seum for education,  ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm.,  Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 
XLIII-B5-2020  (2020) 83–90 . 08 
[27] G. Bozzelli, A. Raia, S. Ricciardi,  M. De Nino, N. Barile, M. Perrella, .M. Tramon-  
tano, A. Pagano, A. Palombini,  An integrated  VR/AR framework  for user-centric  
interactive  experience  of cultural heritage:  the ArkaeVision  project, Digit. Appl. 
Archaeol.  Cult. Herit. 15 (2019) e00124 . 
[28] F. Bruno, A. Lagudi, G. Ritacco, P. Agraﬁotis,  D. Skarlatos,  J. ˇCejka, P. Kou ˇril, 
F. Liarokapis,  O. Philpin-Briscoe,  C. Poullis, S. Mudur, B. Simon, Development  
and integration  of digital technologies  addressed  to raise awareness  and ac- 
cess to European  underwater  cultural heritage.  An overview  of the H2020 I–
mareculture  project, in: OCEANS 2017 - Aberdeen,  2017, pp. 1–10 . 
[29] S. Cai, E. Ch’ng, Y. Li, A comparison  of the capacities  of VR and 360-degree  
video for coordinating  memory in the experience  of cultural heritage,  in: 2018 
3rd Digital Heritage International  Congress  (DigitalHERITAGE)  Held Jointly with 
2018 24th International  Conference  on Virtual Systems & Multimedia  (VSMM 
2018), 2018, pp. 1–4 . 
[30] K. Choroma  ´nski, J. Łobodecki,  K. Puchała, W. Ostrowski,  Development  of vir- 
tual reality application  for cultural heritage visualization  from multi-source  3D 
data, ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm.,  Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. XLII-2/W9  
(2019) 261–267  . 01 
[31] R. Comes, C. Neam ¸t u, Z. Buna, S. Bodi, D. Popescu,  V. Tompa, R. Ghinea, L. 
Mateescu-Suciu,  Enhancing  accessibility  to cultural heritage through digital 
content and virtual reality: a case study of the Sarmizegetusa  Regia UNESCO 
site, J. Anc. Hist. Archaeol.,  7 (2020) 124-139.  09 
[32] R. Comes, C.G.D. Neam ¸t u, C. Grec, Z.L. Buna, C. G ˘azdac, L. Mateescu-Suciu,  Digi- 
tal reconstruction  of fragmented  cultural heritage assets: the case study of the 
Dacian embossed  disk from Piatra Ro ¸s ie, Appl. Sci. 12 (16) (2022) 8131 . 
[33] L.T. De Paolis, S. Chiarello,  C. Gatto, S. Liaci, V. De Luca, Virtual reality for the 
enhancement  of cultural tangible and intangible  heritage:  the case study of 
the castle of Corsano,  Digit. Appl. Archaeol.  Cult. Herit. 27 (2022) e00238 . 
[34] L. Debailleux,  H. Geoffrey,  N. Duroisin,  Exploring  cultural heritage using virtual 
reality, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 10605 (2018) 289–303  . 02 
[35] F. Debandi,  R. Iacoviello,  A. Messina,  M. Montagnuolo,  F. Manuri, A. Sanna, 
D. Zappia, Enhancing  cultural tourism by a mixed reality application  for out- 
door navigation  and information  browsing  using immersive  devices, IOP Conf. 
Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. 364 (2018) 012048 . 6 
[36] G. Drossis, C. Birliraki, C. Stephanidis,  Interaction  with immersive  cultural her- 
itage environments  using virtual reality technologies,  in: HCI International  
281
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
2018 –P o s t e r s ’  Extended  Abstracts,  Springer International  Publishing,  Cham, 
2018, pp. 177–183 . 
[37] Z. Duer, T. Ogle, D. Hicks, S. Fralin, T. Tucker, R. Yu, Making the invisible visi- 
ble: illuminating  the hidden histories  of the world War I tunnels at Vauquois  
through a hybridized  virtual reality exhibition,  IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 40 
(4) (2020) 39–50 . 7 
[38] A. Egea-Vivancos,  L. Arias-Ferrer,  Principles  for the design of a history and her- 
itage game based on the evaluation  of immersive  virtual reality video games, 
E-Learn. Digit. Media 18 (4) (2021) 383–402  . 
[39] L. Errichiello,  R. Micera, M. Atzeni, G.D. Chiappa,  Exploring  the implications  of 
wearable  virtual reality technology  for museum  visitors’ experience:  a cluster 
analysis, Int. J. Tourism Res. 21 (2019) 590–605  . 05 
[40] L. Falconer,  D. Burden, R. Cleal, R. Hoyte, P. Phelps, N. Slawson,  N. Snashall,  
K. Welham,  Virtual Avebury:  exploring  sense of place in a virtual archaeology  
simulation,  Virtual Archaeol.  Rev. 11 (23) (2020) 50–62 . 7 
[41] R. Galdieri, M. Carrozzino,  Natural interaction  in virtual reality for cultural 
heritage,  in: M. Dugulean  ˘a, M. Carrozzino,  M. Gams, I. Tanea (Eds.), VR Tech- 
nologies in Cultural Heritage,  Springer International  Publishing,  Cham, 2019, 
pp. 122–131 . 
[42] E. Geronikolakis,  P. Zikas, S. Kateros, N. Lydatakis,  S. Georgiou,  M. Kentros, 
G. Papagiannakis,  A True AR Authoring  Tool for Interactive  Virtual Museums,  
Springer International  Publishing,  Cham, 2020, pp. 225–242  . 
[43] A. Hajirasouli,  S. Banihashemi,  A. Kumarasuriyar,  S. Talebi, A. Tabadkani,  Virtual 
reality-based  digitisation  for endangered  heritage sites: theoretical  framework  
and application,  J. Cult. Herit. 49 (2021) 140–151 . 
[44] J. Häkkilä, P. Hannula,  E. Luiro, E. Launne, S. Mustonen,  T. Westerlund,  A. Col- 
ley, Visiting a virtual graveyard:  designing  virtual reality cultural heritage ex- 
periences,  in: Proceedings  of the 18th International  Conference  on Mobile and 
Ubiquitous  Multimedia,  MUM ’19, New York, NY, USA, Association  for Comput-  
ing Machinery,  2019 . 
[45] R. Hammady,  M. Ma, C. Strathearn,  Ambient  information  visualisation  and vis- 
itors technology  acceptance  of mixed reality in museums,  J. Comput. Cult. 
Herit. 13 (2) (2020) 1–22 . 6 
[46] R. Hammady,  M. Ma, C. Strathearn,  M. Mohamad,  Design and development  of 
a spatial mixed reality touring guide to the egyptian  museum,  Multimed.  Tools 
Appl. 79 (2020) 3465–3494  . 02 
[47] R. Hammady,  M. Ma, Designing  Spatial UI as a Solution of the Narrow FOV 
of Microsoft  HoloLens:  Prototype  of Virtual Museum  Guide, Springer Interna- 
tional Publishing,  Cham, 2019, pp. 217–231 . 
[48] R. Hammady,  M. Ma, Z. Alkalha, C. Strathearn,  A framework  for constructing  
and evaluating  the role of mr as a holographic  virtual guide in museums,  Vir- 
tual Real. 12 (2021) 895–918 . 
[49] J. Horáková,  J. Mucha, Computer  graphic re-visited:  the virtual reconstruction  
of one of the ﬁrst computer  art exhibitions  computer  graphic re-visited:  the 
virtual reconstruction  of one of the ﬁrst computer  art exhibitions,  Proc. IEEE 
107 (2019) 616–629  . 03 
[50] F.Z. Kaghat, A. Azough, M. Fakhour,  M. Meknassi,  A new audio augmented  re- 
ality interaction  and adaptation  model for museum  visits, Comput. Electr. Eng. 
84 (2020) 106606 . 
[51] T. Kersten, F. Tschirschwitz,  M. Lindstaedt,  S. Deggim, The historic wooden 
model of Solomon’s  temple: 3Drecording,  modelling  and immersive  virtual re- 
ality visualisation,  J. Cult. Herit. Manag. Sustain. Dev. 8 (2018) 448–464  . 09 
[52] T. Krzywinska,  T. Phillips, A. Parker, M.J. Scott, From immersion’s  bleeding  edge 
to the augmented  telegrapher:  a method for creating mixed reality games for 
museum  and heritage contexts,  J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 13 (4) (2020) 1–20 . 12 
[53] S. Kusajima,  T. Takahashi,  Y. Sumi, Virtual participation  in ukiyo-e apprecia-  
tion using body motion, in: Proceedings  of the 9th Augmented  Human Inter- 
national Conference,  AH ’18, New York, NY, USA, Association  for Computing  
Machinery,  2018 . 
[54] E. Litvak, T. Kuﬂik, Enhancing  cultural heritage outdoor experience  with aug- 
mented-reality  smart glasses, Pers. Ubiquitous  Comput. 24 (2020) 873–886  . 12 
[55] D. Alejandro,  L. Carvajal, M.M. Morita, G.M. Bilmes, V. museums,  Captured  re- 
ality and 3D modeling,  J. Cult. Herit. 45 (2020) 234–239  . 
[56] M.G. Masciotta,  M.J. Morais, L.F. Ramos, D.V. Oliveira, L.J. Sánchez-Aparicio,  
D. González-Aguilera,  A digital-based  integrated  methodology  for the preven- 
tive conservation  of cultural heritage:  the experience  of heritagecare  project, 
Int. J. Archit. Herit. 15 (6) (2021) 844–863  . 
[57] J. McCarthy,  K. Martin, Virtual reality for maritime  archaeology  in 2.5D: a vir- 
tual dive on a ﬂute wreck of 1659 in Iceland, in: 2019 23rd International  Con- 
ference in Information  Visualization  - Part II, 2019, pp. 104–109 . 
[58] W.K. Obeidy, H. Arshad, J.Y. Huang, TouristicAR:  a smart glass augmented  re- 
ality application  for UNESCO world heritage sites in Malaysia,  J. Telecommun.,  
Electron.  Comput. Eng. (JTEC) 10 (3–2) (2018) 101–108 . 9 
[59] E. Parker, M. Saker, Art museums  and the incorporation  of virtual reality: ex- 
amining the impact of VR on spatial and social norms, Convergence  26 (5–6) 
(2020) 1159–1173  . 
[60] G. Pehlivanides,  K. Monastiridis,  A. Tourtas, E. Karyati, G. Ioannidis,  K. Bejelou, 
V. Antoniou,  P. Nomikou,  The virtualdiver  project. Making Greece’s underwater  
cultural heritage accessible  to the public, Appl. Sci. 10 (22) (2020) 8172 . 
[61] E. Pérez, P. Merchán,  M.J. Merchán,  S. Salamanca,  Virtual reality to foster social 
integration  by allowing  wheelchair  users to tour complex archaeological  sites 
realistically,  Remote Sens. 12 (3) (2020) 419 . 
[62] D. Petrelli, Making virtual reconstructions  part of the visit: an exploratory  
study, Digit. Appl. Archaeol.  Cult. Herit. 15 (2019) e00123 . 
[63] F. Ragusa, A. Furnari, S. Battiato, G. Signorello,  G.M. Farinella,  Egocentric  visi- 
tors localization  in cultural sites, J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 12 (2) (2019) . 4 [64] G. Schoﬁeld,  G. Beale, N. Beale, M. Fell, D. Hadley, J. Hook, D. Murphy, 
J. Richards,  L. Thresh, Viking VR: designing  a virtual reality experience  for a 
museum,  in: Proceedings  of the 2018 Designing  Interactive  Systems Confer- 
ence, DIS ’18, Association  for Computing  Machinery,  New York, NY, USA, 2018, 
pp. 805–815  . 
[65] M. Secci, C. Beltrame,  S. Manﬁo, F. Guerra, Virtual reality in maritime  archae- 
ology legacy data for a virtual diving on the shipwreck  of the Mercurio  (1812), 
J. Cult. Herit. 40 (2019) 169–176 . Multidisciplinary  study of the Sarno Baths in 
Pompeii 
[66] E. Selmanovi  ´c, S. Rizvic, C. Harvey, D. Boskovic,  V. Hulusic, M. Chahin, S. Sljivo, 
Improving  accessibility  to intangible  cultural heritage preservation  using vir- 
tual reality, J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 13 (2) (2020) 1–19 . 5 
[67] F. Settembrini,  M.G. Angelini,  D. Costantino,  Virtual museum,  the exploration  
of cultural heritage with virtual reality techniques,  in: L.T. De Paolis, P. Bour- 
dot (Eds.), Augmented  Reality, Virtual Reality, and Computer  Graphics,  Springer 
International  Publishing,  Cham, 2018, pp. 392–400  . 
[68] S. Sylaiou, V. Kasapakis,  E. Dzardanova,  D. Gavalas, Assessment  of virtual 
guides’ credibility  in virtual museum  environments,  in: L.T. De Paolis, P. Bour- 
dot (Eds.), Augmented  Reality, Virtual Reality, and Computer  Graphics,  Springer 
International  Publishing,  Cham, 2019, pp. 230–238  . 
[69] P. Tennent,  S. Martindale,  S. Benford, D. Darzentas,  P. Brundell,  M. Collishaw,  
Thresholds:  embedding  virtual reality in the museum,  J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 
13 (2) (2020) 1–35 . 5 
[70] S. Teruggi, E. Grilli, F. Fassi, F. Remondino,  3D surveying,  semantic  enrichment  
and virtual access of large cultural heritage,  ISPRS Ann. Photogramm.,  Remote 
Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. VIII-M-1-2021  (2021) 155–162 . 
[71] M.C.t. Dieck, T. Jung, E. Michopoulou,  Experiencing  Virtual Reality in Heritage 
Attractions:  Perceptions  of Elderly Users, Springer International  Publishing,  
Cham, 2019, pp. 89–98 . 
[72] G. Trichopoulos,  J. Aliprantis,  M. Konstantakis,  K. Michalakis,  G. Caridakis,  Tan- 
gible and personalized  DS application  approach  in cultural heritage:  the chats 
project, Computers  11 (2) (2022) 19 . 
[73] Y. Trindade,  F. Rebelo, P. Noriega, Tourism and virtual reality: user experi- 
ence evaluation  of a virtual environment  prototype,  in: A. Marcus, W. Wang 
(Eds.), Design, User Experience,  and Usability:  Users, Contexts  and Case Stud- 
ies, Springer International  Publishing,  Cham, 2018, pp. 730–742  . 
[74] Y. Trindade,  F. Rebelo, P. Noriega, Dissemination  of São Tomé and  principe cul- 
ture through virtual reality: comparative  UX study between  potential  tourists 
from Portugal and Santomean  inhabitants,  in: Design, User Experience,  and Us- 
ability: Design for Emotion,  Well-Being  and Health, Learning,  and Culture: 11th 
International  Conference,  DUXU 2022, Held as Part of the 24th HCI Interna- 
tional Conference,  HCII 2022, Virtual Event, June 26–July 1, 2022, Proceedings,  
Part II, Springer-Verlag,  Berlin, Heidelberg,  2022, pp. 466–476  . 
[75] I. Trizio, S. Brusaporci,  A. Luigini, A. Ruggieri,  A. Basso, P. Maiezza,  A. Tata, 
A. Giannangeli,  Experiencing  the inaccessible.  a framework  for virtual inter- 
pretation  and visualization  of remote, risky or restricted  access heritage places, 
in: ISPRS - International  Archives of the Photogrammetry,  Remote Sensing and 
Spatial Information  Sciences,  vol. XLII-2/W15,  2019, pp. 1171–1178  . 08 
[76] S. Vlizos, J.-A. Sharamyeva,  K. Kotsopoulos,  Interdisciplinary  design of an ed- 
ucational  applications  development  platform  in a 3D environment  focused on 
cultural heritage tourism, in: M. Shehade,  T. Stylianou-Lambert  (Eds.), Emerg- 
ing Technologies  and the Digital Transformation  of Museums  and Heritage 
Sites, Springer International  Publishing,  Cham, 2021, pp. 79–96 . 
[77] K. Yoo, N. Gold, Emotion evoking art exhibition  in VR, 25th ACM Symposium  
on Virtual Reality Software  and Technology,  VRST ’19, Association  for Comput-  
ing Machinery,  New York, NY, USA, 2019 . 
[78] E. Zerman, N. O’Dwyer,  G.W. Young, A. Smolic, A case study on the use of vol- 
umetric video in augmented  reality for cultural heritage,  in: Proceedings  of 
the 11th Nordic Conference  on Human-Computer  Interaction:  Shaping Expe- 
riences, Shaping Society, Association  for Computing  Machinery,  NordiCHI  ’20, 
New York, NY, USA, 2020 . 
[79] J. Zhang, G. Zou, G. Zhang, “Meet the deer king”: “splash-ink” interaction  in 
the innovative  VR game based on Dunhuang  art and culture, SIGGRAPH  Asia 
2021 XR, Association  for Computing  Machinery,  SA ’21 XR, New York, NY, USA, 
2021 . 
[80] F. Liarokapis,  I. Vidová, S. Rizvi ´c, S. Demesticha,  D. Skarlatos,  Underwater  
search and discovery:  from serious games to virtual reality, in: C. Stephanidis,  
J.Y.C. Chen, G. Fragomeni  (Eds.), HCI International  2020 – Late Breaking  Papers: 
Virtual and Augmented  Reality, Springer International  Publishing,  Cham, 2020, 
pp. 178–197 . 
[81] M. Doležal, M. Vlachos, M. Secci, S. Demesticha,  D. Skarlatos,  F. Liarokapis,  
Understanding  underwater  photogrammetry  for maritime  archaeology  through 
immersive  virtual reality, in: The International  Archives of the Photogramme-  
try, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information  Sciences,  vol. XLII-2/W10,  2019, 
pp. 85–91 . 
[82] P. Kou ˇril, F. Liarokapis,  Simulation  of underwater  excavation  using dredging  
procedures,  IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 38 (2) (2018) 103–111 . 
[83] W. Schweibenz,  The virtual museum:  an overview  of its origins, concepts,  and 
terminology,  Museum  Rev. 4 (2019) 1–29 . 08 
[84] V. Komianos,  Immersive  applications  in museums:  an analysis of the use of 
XR technologies  and the provided  functionality  based on systematic  literature  
review, JOIV: Int. J. Inform. Vis. 6 (1) (2022) 60–73 . 
[85] D. Kosmopoulos,  G. Styliaras,  A survey on developing  personalized  content ser- 
vices in museums,  Pervasive  Mob. Comput. 47 (2018) 54–77 . 
[86] E. Pratisto, N. Thompson,  V. Potdar, Immersive  technologies  for tourism:  a sys- 
tematic review, Inf. Technol. Tourism 24 (2022) 1–39 . 06 
282
C. Innocente,  L. Ulrich, S. Moos et al. Journal of Cultural Heritage 62 (2023) 268–284 
[87] L. Gomes, O. Regina Pereira Bellon, L. Silva, 3D reconstruction  methods  for dig- 
ital preservation  of cultural heritage:  a survey, Pattern Recognit.  Lett. 50 (2014) 
3–14 . Depth Image Analysis 
[88] Y. Jung, Y. Wu, H. Jung, J. Kim, Model Reconstruction  of Real-World  3D Ob- 
jects: An Application  with Microsoft  HoloLens,  Springer International  Publish- 
ing, Cham, 2021, pp. 89–104 . 
[89] C. Wang, Y. Zhu, A survey of museum  applied research based on mobile aug- 
mented reality, Comput. Intell. Neurosci.  2022 (2022) 2926241  . 8 [90] S. Bhakar, D.P. Bhatt, V. Dhaka, Y. Sarma, A review on classiﬁcations  of tracking 
systems in augmented  reality, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 2161 (2022) 012077 . 01 
[91] A. Sadeghi-Niaraki,  S.-M. Choi, A survey of marker-less  tracking and registra- 
tion techniques  for health & environmental  applications  to augmented  reality 
and ubiquitous  geospatial  information  systems, Sensors 20 (10) (2020) 2997 . 
[92] S. Elder, A. Vakaloudis,  Towards uniformity  for smart glasses devices: an as- 
sessment  of function as the driver for standardisation,  in: 2015 IEEE Interna- 
tional Symposium  on Technology  and Society (ISTAS), 2015, pp. 1–7 . 
283 
