A REVIEW OF RECENT RESEARCH IN INDOOR MODELLING & MAPPING   
 
 
M. Gunduz a, U. Isikdag b*, M. Basaranera  
 
a Yildiz Technical University , Dept. of. Geomatic  Engineering , Istanbul Turkey – memogedo@gmail.com; mbasaran@yildiz.edu.tr  
b Mimar Sinan Fine Arts Un iversity, Dept. of Informatics, Istanbul Turkey – uisikdag@gmail.com  
 
Commission  IV, WG  IV/7  
 
 
 
KEY WORDS: Indoor, Mapping, Modelling,  Navigation,  IFC, CityGML, IndoorGML   
 
 
ABSTRACT:  
 
Indoor modeling and mapping  has been an active area of research in last 20 years in order to tackle the problems related to 
positioning and tracking of people and objects indoors, and provides many opportunities for several domains ranging from 
emergency response to logistics in mic ro urban spaces. The outputs of recent research in the field have been presented in several 
scientific publications and events primarily related to spatial information science and technology.  This paper summarizes th e outputs 
of last 10 years of research on indoor modeling and mapping within a proper classification which covers 7 areas, i.e. Information 
Acquisition by Sensors, Model Definition , Model Integration , Indoor Positioning and LBS , Routing & Navigation Methods, 
Augmented  and Virtual Reality Applic ations, and Ethical Issues.  Finally, the paper outlines the current and future  research directions 
and concluding remarks.  
 
 
                                                                 
*  Corresponding author  
 1. INTRODUCTION  
Our complex world requires developing much smarter scenarios 
for our living environments. Along with the availability  of 
spatial information almost ubiquitously in the current societies, 
spatial applications have been expanding into indoor spaces. 3D 
spatial information about indoor environments has increasingly 
been demanded  in various  applications such as risk and disaster 
management, human trajectory identification , and facility 
management. The scientific and technological progress in 3D 
spatial data acquisition as well as 3D city and building 
modeling has been evolv ing into more sophisticated hardware, 
software , stand ards, techniques and uses specific to  indoor 
modeling and mapping.  Sensors provide a key role for 
acquisition of indoor information, hard sensors such as laser 
scanners, RGB -D cameras, and gyro  sensors/accelerometers are 
today main subjects of research in the field, while there are 
opportunities that are provided by machine learning (i.e. self -
learning devices that can be used as soft -sensors). Indoor Data 
Models such as IFC, CityGML and IndoorGML appear as the 
main focus of current research in the field. T he studies in the 
area concentrate on enhancing these models and tailoring these 
models to fit the needs of different application domains. 
Another  area that the paper is focusing on is Integration,  i.e. a 
topic which includes studies on fusion of informati on coming 
from multiple sources and the area also covers efforts on 
integration of information residing in multiple data models. 
Another area of research in the field is i ndoor positioning which 
refers to the task of inferring the location of a mobile devi ce 
inside  a building. Although m any techniques for positioning are 
available , a limited number of algorithms and methods can infer 
indoor location information from measurements.  For indoor 
location -based services (LBS), both sufficiently accurate 
positioni ng as well as quality and information -rich indoor maps 
are required (Werner, 2014) Proposing new and better approaches for indoor navigation and routing is  also an active 
field of research. In this field some s tudies focus on 
optimization of routing where there are dynamically changing 
conditions and multi -targets. Outputs  of indoor modelling and 
navigation research facilitate the everyday operations of several 
domains including sales in retail stores, fire response scenarios, 
building maintenance activitie s. Virtual and augmented reality 
applications increase human’s perception of real world and 
carry remarkable potential for indoor environments . Ethical 
issues also are important  elements of research as these are 
concerned with  privacy of people .  
 
2. METHODOL OGY  
The aim of the research was to review of literature in the field of 
Indoor Modelling  and Mapping,  and outlining the main 
research directions in this field. The study started with the 
review of literature focused on papers presented in ISPRS 
3DGeoInfo C onference in last ten years and also covered the 
papers of Indoor 3D Workshop which has been organized in 
Cape Town in 2013. The researchers have come across 51 
papers directly related to Indoor Modeling and Navigation 
among the papers that were investigat ed during the review. The 
findings of the review are then classified into 7 categories as A. 
Information Acquisition by Sensors, B. Model Definition,  C. 
Model Integration,  D. Indoor Positioning and LBS,  E. Routing 
& Navigation Methods,  F. Augmented and Vir tual Reality 
Applications, and  G. Ethical Issues . The following section 
elaborates on these categories.  
 
 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLI-B4, 2016 
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.  
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XLI-B4-289-2016 
 
289
 
3. RESEARCH FIELDS IN I NDOOR MODELING  
3.1 Information Acquisition by Sensors  
Sensors can be used to acquire information in order to build up 
the indoor model s (i.e. such as laser scanners) and they also aid 
in locating people and objects within the indoor environment. 
Terrestrial laser scanners can be used for creating point clouds  
to represent indoor environment . In fact, this process is time  
consuming and re quires detailed planning. The research has 
also demonstrated the use of Laser Scanners for localization. In 
fact, p revious research indicates that only one mobile laser 
scanner is not sufficient  for precise localization. Using two 
mobile laser scanners  is required  for achievin g good 
localization results ( Kaijaluoto  et al., 2015).  Point clouds can 
help in generation of the building  models  at different level of 
details (Achille and Fassi, 2006) . Sometimes it  may be hard to 
find 3D CAD models of buildings. Eve n it is possible to find 
the related CAD model, due to lack of the coordinate 
information they can be difficult  to use. Besides, indoor objects’ 
place may change or new objects may be added in time  in the 
buildings . So, it could be helpful to scan, model t he buildings 
with 3D terrestrial laser scanner  with some intervals . However , 
it is time consuming to create  3D models and as the approach is 
not fully automated, and as it requires an experienced operator  
(Dongzhen et al., 2009).  Fusion  of sensor informati on is also 
found useful in information structuring. For example, Wang and 
Sohn ( 2010)  used Airbone laser scanning (ALS) for outdoor 
information acquisition  and terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) is 
used for indoor  information acquisition .  Architectural plan s 
were then  integrated with TLS data using point matching 
method. Finally, outdoor model and indoor model structured 
and semantically integrated simultaneously  in the study . 
Acquired data from sensors can be beneficial in generation of 
semantically rich di gital building models (Meouche  et al.,  2013)  
and models such as BIM . Yoon et al . (2015) utilized p oint 
clouds generated by laser scanners  to create 3D geometries 
which would form the basis for a BIM. Stereo Vision Systems 
can also be used to acquire inform ation about indoors. For 
instance, researchers have reported a p ortable system for 
seamless outdoor -indoor modeling which ha s four cameras and 
can be moved/operated by one person.  In this system, fo ur 
cameras gather stereo images and as a result  3D models can be 
automatically generated  with high efficiency. (Shao et al., 
2015) . Sensors  that acquire indoor information can also be used 
in aiding navigation for instance RGB -D cameras (Kanai  et al. , 
2015)  and commercial ones such as Microsoft Kinect were used 
for aiding indoor navigation. (Pagliari et al., 2015) .  It is also 
possible to generate point clouds from video recordings. Teo 
(2015)  aimed to generate point cloud s from video data. The 
phases of the process were  camera calibration, video conversion 
and al ignment, orientation modeling, dense matching and 
evaluation. Huge computational time, low image quality caused 
by video compression and motion blur were the weak  sides of 
this method.   
 
3.2 Model Definition  
Building up data models for representing indoors is an 
important area of research in indoor modeling. Development 
and implementation of new data types and data structures is one 
of the key areas of model definition research.  For example, 
Gold et al . (2006) implemented a Quad -Edge structure used for 
generati ng building exteriors. Boguslawski  and Gold (2009) 
used Augmented Quad Edge (AQE) which is an irregular 
decomposition 3D data model. AQE is suitable to create primal and dual spaces simultaneously. Boguslawski and Gold (20 10) 
stated that b uilding model s can be constructed using Euler 
operators.  In their implementation  states/ attributes of node, 
edge, face or volume can be changed if needed . Multi -layered 
indoor models is an important research topic in the field. As 
indicated by Becker et al . (2009) in a mul ti-layered indoor 
model t opographic and sensor space can be represented in 
different layers.  While topographic space represents building’s 
3D model; stories, rooms, corridors and their relationships, 
sensor space represents Wi -Fi, RFID  sensors  and so on . 
International standards such as CityGML also provide indoor 
representations. CityGML Indoor Application Domain 
Extension  (ADE)  is an indoor spatial model (XML schema) 
based on CityGML. The ADE includes indoor space features 
and indoor facility features for  indoor facility management (Kim 
et al.,  2014) . Shape grammars can also be used to define indoor 
models. For instance, Becker et al. (2013) proposed a  full 
automatic approach to generate 3D building interior models 
from partly erroneous or incomplete obser vation data.  
 
3.3 Model Integration  
The topic of model integration covers integration of information 
acquired from sensors and also fusion of information coming 
from different models. As an example of the former method 
Wohlfeil  et al. (2013) utilized multi -scale sensor systems and 
semi-global matching for reconstruction of cultural heritage 
sites. Nakagawa et al . (2015) proposed a methodology for 
generation of 3D topologies from indoor mobile LIDAR data. 
Fusion of information was viewed as a key method in ins tance 
(object) population in indoor models. For example , Isikdag and 
Zlatanova  (2009) offer a formal framework for seamless 
integration between IFC and CityGML. Most of the model 
integration studies are focused  on unidirectional information 
transfer , where  information from  IFC model is transferred  into 
the CityGML model. The work of  El-Mekawy  et al.  (2011) 
proposed  a bidirectional data model integration for IFC and 
CityGML.  In another effort by Laat and vanBerlo (2011) 
implemented  a CityGML extension namely  GeoBIM for 
extending CityGML with more detailed (semantic) information 
about the inner structure of buildings.  Studies focusing on 
seamless i ntegration of outdoor and indoor models and 
applications have also gained momentum  recently . In this 
context, stan dards have a prominent role and some missing 
elements in relevant standards such as IFC and CityGML for 
indoor applications, particularly indoor navigation, are now 
being addressed by IndoorGML (IndoorGML Web, 2016). The 
more challenging issue is the devel opment of standards for 
indoor location detection/computation technologies. This may 
continue to be a brake on the development of seamless 
indoor/outdoor location applications (UN -GGIM, 2015). Recent  
studies such as Kim and Lee (2015), Jung and Lee (2015) 
proposed methods for generation of IndoorGML objects. 
Internet of Things (IoT) is a new research field that focuses on 
enabling interaction between online “Things” . Isikdag (2014) 
stated that integration of information from “Things” with indoor 
information  models will provide unique opportunities for 
indoor localization and navigation.  Indoor navigation models 
can be enriched by information coming from multiple resources. 
Information transfer from BIM into indoor navigation models is 
the mainstream approach  in the field. Hijazi et al. (2010) built 
up indoor utility networks based on information derived from 
IFC BIMs. Geiger et al. (2014) proposed a method of 
generalization to represent BIM information in CityGML. 
Further efforts in this direction can contrib ute to the population 
of indoor model entities. In fact, as BIMs contain much detailed  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLI-B4, 2016 
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.  
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XLI-B4-289-2016 
 
290
 
semantic and geometric information , information simplification 
is also required in this transformation.  (Tang  et al. , 2015)  
 
3.4 Indoor Positioning and LBS  
There are many w ays for indoor positioning like WiFi, RFID, 
Visible Light Connection and indoor GPS. Krishnamurthy 
(2015) gives a systematic classification of indoor positioning 
technologies (RF -based and non -RF-based) and methods 
(Figure 1). Under t he RF-based technologi es, it is common to 
employ Wi -Fi as the technology of choice, although Bluetooth, 
RFID, and cell phone technologies (cellular) are also possible 
choices.  Among non -RF-based technologies, acoustic 
technologies that use either ultrasound or sound for localiz ation 
have received attention. Dead reckoning and signage are the 
obvious choices for localization in indoor areas without a 
positioning infrastructure. Some combination of the approaches 
is also feasible . The common methodologies are those based on 
proxim ity to a known device, those that use the time of arrival 
(TOA) of a signal, those that use TOA and direction of arrival 
(DOA), and finally those that employ location fingerprinting.  In 
terms of positioning, indoor areas have some disadvantages in 
comparis on to outdoor environments. Weak signal penetration 
and multipath signal propagation make it difficult to determine 
the time or direction of arrival of signals.  Besides, positional 
accuracy requirement is higher, usually at meter level or better. 
Furthermo re, buildings are in most cases multi -storey and 
positioning method and localization schemes can not work 
accurately if they do not recognize this information.   
 
 
Figure 1. Positioning technologies and methods for indoor areas 
(Adapted from Krishnamurthy , 2015).  
 
Integrated positioning system (IPS) used for more accurate 
inertial navigation. IPS hardware has a pair of stereo camera to 
acquire stereo images. (Grießbach  et al. , 2013) . Fuse and 
Matsumoto  (2015) proposed an information fusion 
methodology comb ining information coming from images, 
GPS, gyro, accelerometers and magnetic field sensors for 
localization.  Lai et al. , (2015)  used low cost and readily 
available sensors calibrated and used for estimate step length 
and strength. Pedestrian navigation is possible by multi -sensor 
(accelerometer and gyroscope) fusion and fuzzy logic 
estimation. Ogawa et al . (2015) proposed an Indoor Messaging 
System (IMES) which is GPS like positioning system and Open 
Location Services (OpenLS) standard selected.  Werner (201 4) 
gives a schematic representation of building blocks of i ndoor 
location -based services ( LBSs)  (Figure 2). Indoor LBSs require 
precise geometric and semantic representation  of buildings in 
addition to sufficiently accurate indoor positioning. It is easy t o 
find geographic data sets and maps for outdoor environments 
but difficult to say the same for indoor spaces, which require  3D 
(or 2.5) maps to allow routing and navigation between floors 
(Karimi, 2015).  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Building blocks of indoor location -based services 
(Adapted from Werner, 2014).  
 
 
3.5 Routing & Navigation Methods  
Methods for facilitating routing and navigation in buildings is 
another valuable topic of indoor modeling research. As outlined 
by Karas  et al . (2006) derivation of n etwork models is a 
necessity  to calculate the optimal route s for indoor navigation. 
Indoor  navigation calculations mainly rely on shortest path 
algorithm , for instance Xiong et al . (2015) proposed a  method 
that uses A* algorithm to create 3D indoor paths. In fact,  
shortest  path is not always the optimal one. For example, in a 
fire emergency situation, shortest path can be generated via 
blocking the paths where fire is ongoing but that is not enough 
to decide that path is secure enough. More parameters should be 
used to gene rate optimal route via risk analysis  (Vanclooster  et 
al., 2013) . As mentioned by Atila et al . (2012) m ost of the 
indoor routing systems are based on 2D or 2,5D models.  There 
are many algorithms for outdoor path routing, but indoor 
routing algorithms are n ot so diverse. Dijk stra’s shortest path 
algorithm is being used at most of the researches. Cognitive 
indoor route algorithms are important and needed as much as 
outdoor routing, especially in three -dimensional systems. At the 
work  of Vanclooster  et al. (20 13), Grum’s least risk path 
algorithm for outdoor space is implemented to indoor routing. 
Using landmarks and salient images while explaining routes to 
other people is a common human behavior but indoor 
navigation systems don’t have such semantics for this  purpose. 
The research  of Arendholz  and Becker  (2015) identified 
potential landmarks, signs and images and then classified them 
by the requirements. Finally, a thematic framework for 
navigation in existing building models like CityGML, IFC or 
KML is genera ted. People use a sign system to find their routes 
in Netherlands. Makri et al . (2015) proposed an  indoor 
navigation system is similar with this sign system. A method 
used for generating graph model automatically. Floor signs 
created with this graph model.  Most of the routing systems are 
not interactive; users can’t change, modify or customize the 
network model. Khan et al . (2014) combined Multi -layered 
Space Event Model (MLSEM) and IndoorGML structures and 
proposed a context aware route planning cloud -based system.  
Work of Goetz and Zipf (2011)  focuse d on navigation in more 
complex situations like considering obstacles at interior space, 
districted areas or vertical building parts. One way paths such as 
escalators or passport control points were  also consi dered  in 
their research . Weighted indoor routing graph  which can 
generate different routes for disabled or elderly people  was 
proposed for user adaptive routing . In order to facilitate 
seamless navigation indoors/outdoors , topological models 
representing connected indoor/outdoor spaces  is required  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLI-B4, 2016 
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.  
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XLI-B4-289-2016 
 
291
 
(Slings by and Raper, 2008). Evacuation management is one of 
the primary domains which makes use of indoor routing and 
navigation methods.  For instance, Atila et al . (2014) proposed a  
solution (data and network gen eration, visualization and 
evacuation model) for fire evacuation scenarios. In a disaster 
scenario, routing for shortest exit path in order to evacuation 
may not enough. People may rush to common doors and 
confluence may happen. Research of Choi  and Lee  (2009) 
aimed to calculate temporal changes during evacuation with 
proposed agent -based model .  
 
3.6 Augmented and Virtual Reality Applications  
There are currently no standards or best practices of how to 
display indoor navigation information. Several attempts us e 
two-dimensional floor plans or three -dimensional building 
models and plot the current position, plus the routing 
information. There seems to be no formal investigation, if these 
representations are understood by the users and help the users in 
their navi gational tasks  (Krisp et al., 2015 ). As new way of 
communicating indoor spatial information , Augmented and 
Virtual Reality (AR&VR) applications are used to assist user’s 
wayfinding activities indoors. With the advent of new AR&VR 
technologies such as Googl e GlassTM, Microsoft HoloLensTM, 
Occulus RiftTM and Samsung GearTM, various methodologies 
for utilizing these technologies will also be proposed and 
implemented by t he researchers  in coming years . For instance, a 
way-finding assistance system  developed  recently , provide s an 
augmented reality based solution for pedestrians. The system  
generates coarse 3D model of destination feature from images 
and displays it at screen on the real -time video if the angle of 
the camera is right. Generated 3D model’s size and  view angle 
changes based on the distance and digital compass, gyroscope 
data acqui red from the mobile device ( Yokoi  et al. , 2015) . 
Another implementation example is provided by Lee and Tsai 
(2015) where 3D building model from panoramic  images  were 
derived  semi-automatically  to assist AR based navigation.  
 
3.7 Ethical Issues  
The issues related to personal privacy and traceability have 
always been a major topic of indoor modeling and navigation 
related research. Verbree et al . (2013) discusses this issue in 
their paper “To Localise or to Be Localised with WiFi in The 
Hubei Museum?”. Indoor positioning systems enable to track 
the position of people, and this help companies to send 
commercial messages depending on the location of them. In 
fact, as o ne could conside r an unrelated content as spam , the 
person  may feel uncomfortable  when he /she received such a 
message.  In order to  prevent that perception, location based 
push message system was offered  by Nakagawa  (2013) . A 
virtual geofence system created  for this purpos e with movement 
tracking. If  the subject person stops/waits on a pre -determined 
location , the system considers that the subject is showing 
attention to that location and a push message content related to 
that location will then be sent  to the user .  
 
4. CONCL USION  
Spatial data collection, representation, processing, analysis and 
visualization methods for indoor modeling and mapping are still 
under development although significant progress has recently 
been made from scientific and technological perspective.  
Conferences such as  ISPRS 3DGeoInfo and Indoor 3D forms 
nice academic forums for discussion of research related to 
indoor modelling and mapping. This paper has presented a systematic summary of the research outputs belonging to last 
ten year s. Precise positi oning techniques, sensor network 
systems, IoT, integrated indoor and outdoor data representation 
models and standards, more sophisticated LBS applications and 
advanced visualization techniques will be key research topics in 
indoor modeling and mapping  research in coming years . 
REFERENCES  
Achille, C., Fassi, F., 2006. 3D multi -scale modelling of the 
interior of the Real Villa of Monza (ITALY). Innov. 3D Geo 
Inf. Syst.  195–205.  
 
Arendholz, K., Becker, T., Arendholz, K., Becker, Á.T., Becker, 
T., 2015. Requir ements on Building Models Enabling the 
Guidance in a Navigation Scenario Using Cognitive Concepts. 
Lect. Notes Geoinf. Cartogr.  157–173.  
 
Atila, U., Karas, I.R., Rahman, A.A., Atila, U., Karas, I.R., 
Rahman, A.A., 2013. A 3D -GIS Implementation for Realizi ng 
3D Network Analysis and Routing Simulation for Evacuation 
Purpose. Lect. Notes Geoinf. Cartogr.  249–260.  
 
Atila, U., Karas, I.R., Turan, M.K., Rahman, A.A., 2014. 
Automatic Generation of 3D Networks in CityGML and Design 
of an Intelligent Individual Ev acuation Model for Building 
Fires  Within the Scope of 3D GIS.  Innovations in 3D Geo -
Information Sciences.  Springer International Publishing, pp. 
123–142.  
 
Becker, S., Peter, M., Fritsch, D., Philipp, D., Baier, P., Dibak, 
C., 2013. Combined Grammar for th e Modeling of Building 
Interiors. ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf.  Sci. 
II-4/W1, 1 –6.  
 
Becker, T., Nagel, C., Kolbe, T.H., 2009. A Multilayered 
Space -Event Model fo r Navigation in Indoor Spaces. 3D Geo -
Information Sciences . Springer Berlin H eidelberg, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, pp. 61 –77.  
 
Boguslawski, P., Gold, C., 2009. Construction Operators for 
Modelling 3D Objects and  Dual Navigation Structures.  3D 
Geo-Information Sciences . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, pp. 47 –59.  
 
Boguslaws ki, P., Gold, C., 2011. Rapid modelling of complex 
building interiors. Adv. 3D Geo -Information Sci ., pp. 43-56.  
 
Choi, J., Lee, J., 2009. 3D Geo -Network for Agent -based 
Building Evacuation Simulation . 3D Geo -Information Sciences . 
Springer Berlin Heidelber g, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 283 –299.  
 
Dongzhen, J., Khoon, T.Y., Zheng, Z., Qi, Z., 2009. Indoor 3D 
Modeling and Visualization with a 3D Terrestrial Laser 
Scanner . 3D Geo -Information Sciences . Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 247 –255.  
 
El Meouche, R., Rezoug, M., Hijazi, I., Maes, D., 2013. 
Automatic Reconstruction of 3D Building Models from 
Terrestrial Laser Scanner Data. ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. 
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci.  II-4/W1, 7 –12.  
 
El-Mekawy, M., Östman, A., Shahzad, K., 2011. T owards 
Interoperating CityGML and IFC Building Models: A Unified 
Model Based Approach. Adv. 3D Geo -Information Sci . 
XXXVIII, 73 –93.  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLI-B4, 2016 
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.  
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XLI-B4-289-2016 
 
292
 
 
Fuse, T., Matsumoto, K., 2015. Self -Localization Method By 
Integrating Sensors. ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote 
Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci . XL-4/W5, 87 –92.  
 
Geiger, A., Benner, J., Haefele, K.H., 2015. Generalization of 
3D IFC Building Models . 3D Geoinformation Science. Springer 
International Publishing , pp. 19 –36.  
 
Goetz, M., Zipf, A., 2011. Formal definition of a user -adaptive 
and length -optimal routing graph for complex indoor 
environments. Geo-spatial Inf. Sci . 14, 119 –128.  
 
Gold, C., Tse, R., Ledoux, H., 2006. Building Reconstruction 
— Outside and In . Innovations in 3D Geo Information Systems . 
Springer Berlin Heidelber g, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 355 –369.  
 
Grießbach, D., Baumbach, D., B örner, A., Zuev, S., 2013. 
Accuracy evaluation of stereo vision aided inertial navigation 
for indoor environments. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 
Spat. Inf. Sci.  - ISPRS Arch. 40, 13 –17.  
 
Hijazi, I., Ehlers, M., Zlata nova, S., Becker, T., Berlo, L. Van, 
2011. Initial Investigations for Modeling Interior Utilities 
Within 3D Geo Context : Transforming Ifc - Interior Utility To 
Citygml / Utilitynetworkade . Advances in 3D Geo -Information 
Sciences , 95-113.  
 
IndoorGML [WWW D ocument], 2016. URL 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/indoorgml  
 
Isikdag, U., 2014. A RESTful Service for Linking Sensors and 
Cellular Spaces. Innov. 3D Geo -Information Sci . 93–105.  
 
Isikdag, U., Zlatanova, S., 2009. Towards Defining a 
Framework for  Automatic Generation of Buildings in CityGML 
Using  Building Information Models.  3D Geo -Information 
Sciences . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 
79–96.  
 
Jung, H., Lee, J., 2015. Indoor Subspacing To Implement 
Indoorgml for Indoor Navigati on. ISPRS - Int. Arch. 
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci . XL-2/W4, 25 –27.  
 
Kaijaluoto, R., Hyyppä, A., 2015. Precise Indoor Localization 
for Mobile Laser Scanner. ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm. 
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci.  XL-4/W5, 1 –6.  
 
Kanai, S.,  Hatakeyama, R., Date, H., 2015. Improvement of 3D 
Monte Carlo Localization Using a Depth Camera and 
Terrestrial Laser Scanner. ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm. 
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci.  XL-4/W5, 61 –66.  
 
Karas, I.R., Batuk, F., Akay, A.E., Baz, I., 2006.  Automatically 
Extracting 3D Models and Network Analysis for Indoors . 
Innovations in 3D Geo Information Systems . Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 395 –404.  
 
Karimi, H.A., 2015. Indoor Wayfinding and Navigation . CRC 
Press, Inc. Boca Raton , FL, USA.  
 
Khan, A., Yao, Z., Kolbe, T., 2015. Context Aware Indoor 
Route Planning Using Semantic 3D Building Models with 
Cloud Computing . 3D Geoinformation Science . Springer 
International Publishing, pp. 175 –192.  
 Kim, M., Lee, J., 2015. Developing  a Me thod t o Generate 
Indoorgml Data From the Omni -Directional Image. ISPRS - Int. 
Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci . XL -2/W4, 17 –
19.  
 
Kim, Y., Kang, H., Lee, J., 2014. Developing CityGML Indoor 
ADE to Manage Indoor Facilities . Innovations in 3D Ge o-
Information Sciences . Springer International Publishing, pp. 
243–265.  
 
Krishnamurthy, P., 2015. Technologies for Positioning in 
Indoor Areas . Indoor Wayfinding and Navigation . CRC Press, 
Inc., FL, USA, pp. 35 –51. 
 
Krisp J. M., Jahnke M., Lyu H. and Fack ler F., 2013. 
Visualization and Communication of Indoor Routing . Progress 
in Location -Based Services  2014. Springer International 
Publishing, pp. 33 – 44.  
 
Laat, R. De, Berlo, L. Van, 2011. Integration of BIM and GIS: 
The development of the CityGML GeoBIM  extension. Adv. 3D 
Geo-Information Sci.  211–225.  
 
Lai, Y.C., Chang, C.C., Tsai, C.M., Lin, S.Y., Huang, S.C., 
2015. Development of a Pedestrian Indoor Navigation System 
Based on Multi -Sensor Fusion and Fuzzy Logic Estimation 
Algorithms . ISPRS - Int. Arch . Photogramm. Remote Sens. 
Spat. Inf. Sci . XL-4/W5, 81 –86.  
 
Lee, I. -C., Tsai, F., 2015. Applications of Panoramic Images: 
From 720° Panorama To Interior 3D Models of Augmented 
Reality. ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. 
Inf. Sci.  XL-4/W5, 1 89–192.  
 
Makri, A., Zlatanova, S., Verbree, E., Delaunay, C., 2015. an 
Approach for Indoor Wayfinding Replicating Main Principles 
of an Outdoor Navigation System for Cyclists . ISPRS - Int. 
Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci . XL, 21 –22.  
 
Nakaga wa, M., 2013. Improvement in the geofencing service 
interface using indoor positioning systems and mobile sensors. 
Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. - ISPRS  
Arch. 40, 27 –30.  
 
Nakagawa, M., Yamamoto, T., Tanaka, S., Shiozaki, M., 
Ohhashi,  T., 2015. Topological 3d Modeling Using Indoor 
Mobile Lidar Data . Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. 
Inf. Sci. - ISPRS , 13–18.  
 
Norris, J., Ordnance Survey, 2015. Future Trends in geospatial 
information management: the five to ten year vision, Sec ond ed.  
Ogawa, K., Verbree, E., Zlatanova, S., Kohtake, N., Ohkami, 
Y., 2011. Toward seamless indoor -outdoor applications: 
Developing stakeholder -oriented location -based services. Geo-
spatial Inf. Sci.  14, 109 –118.  
 
Pagliari, D., Cazzaniga, N.E., Pinto, L ., 2015. Use of Assisted 
Photogrammetry for Indoor and Outdoor Navigation Purposes. 
ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci . 
XL-4/W5, 113 –118.  
 
Shao, Z., Li, C., Zhong, S., Liu, B., Jiang, H., Wen, X., 2015. 
3D Reconstruction of Cultura l Tourism Attractions From 
Indoor To Outdoor Based on Portable Four -Camera Stereo 
Vision System. ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 
Spat. Inf. Sci.  XL-4/W5, 193 –197.  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLI-B4, 2016 
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.  
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XLI-B4-289-2016 
 
293
 
 
Slingsby, A., Raper, J., 2008. Navigable Space in 3D City 
Models for Pedestrian s Brief Review of 3D city modelling 
approaches . Advances in 3D Geoinformation Systems . 49–64.  
 
Tang, S.J., Zhu, Q., Wang, W.W., Zhang, Y.T., 2015. 
Automatic Topology Derivation From Ifc Building Model for 
in-Door Intelligent Navigation. ISPRS - Int. Arch.  Photogramm. 
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. XL-4/W5, 7 –11.  
 
Teo, T., 2015. Video -Based Point Cloud Generation Using 
Multiple Action Cameras. ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm. 
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci.  XL-4/W5, 55 –60.  
 
Vanclooster,  a., Viaene, P., Van de W eghe, N., Fack, V., De 
Maeyer, P., 2013. Analyzing the applicability of the least risk 
path algorithm in indoor space. ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. 
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci.  II-4/W1, 19 –26.  
 
Vanclooster,  a., Viaene, P., Van de Weghe, N., Fack, V., De 
Maeyer , P., 2013. Analyzing the applicability of the least risk 
path algorithm in indoor space. ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. 
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci.  II-4/W1, 19 –26.  
 
Verbree, E., Zlatanova, S., Van Winden, K., Van Der Laan, E., 
Makri, A., Taizhou, L., Haojun, A. , 2013. To localise or to be 
localised with WiFi in the Hubei museum? Int. Arch. 
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. - ISPRS  Arch. 40, 
31–35.  
 
Wang, L., Sohn, G., 2011. An Integrated Framework for 
Reconstructing Full 3D Building Models. Lect. Notes G eoinf. 
Cartogr. XXXVIII, 261-274.  
 
Werner, M., 2014. Indoor Location -Based Services . Springer 
International Publishing, Cham.  
 
Wohlfeil, J., Strackenbrock, B., Kossyk, I., 2013. Automated 
high resolution 3d reconstruction of cultural heritage using 
multi -scale sensor systems and semi -global matching. Int. Arch. 
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. - ISPRS  Arch. 40, 
37–43.  
 
Xiong, Q., Zhu, Q., Zlatanova, S., Du, Z., Zhang, Y., Zeng, L., 
2015. Multi -Level Indoor Path Planning Method. ISPRS - Int. 
Arch.  Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci.  XL-4/W5, 19 –
23.  
 
Yokoi, K., Yabuki, N., Fukuda, T., Michikawa, T., Motamedi, 
A., 2015. Way -Finding Assistance System for Underground 
Facilities Using Augmented Reality. ISPRS - Int. Arch. 
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. XL-4/W5, 37 –41.  
 
Yoon, S., Jung, J., Heo, J., 2015. Practical Implementation of 
Semi -Automated As -Built Bim Creation for Complex Indoor 
Environments. ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 
Spat. Inf. Sci.  XL-4/W5, 143 –146.  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLI-B4, 2016 
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.  
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XLI-B4-289-2016 
 
294
