SENTINET: a deep sentiment analysis network for political media bias detection artículo de investigación / research articlennnn
Anuradha Yenkikar, C. Narendra Babu and D. Jude Hemanth
SENTINET: a deep sentiment analysis
network for political media bias
detection
SENTINET: Una red de análisis profundo de sentimientos para la detección de
prejuicios políticos en los medios de comunicación
nnnn
Anuradha Yenkikar1, *, C. Narendra Babu1 and D. Jude Hemanth2
1 M. S. Ramaiah University of Applied Sciences. Gnanagangothri Campus. New BEL Road. 560054Bengaluru, Karnataka (India).
2 Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences. Karunya Nagar - 641114Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu (India).
* Corresponding author
DOI: https://doi.org/10.6036/10593 | Received: 26/jul/2022 • Reviewing: 26/jul/2022 • Accepted: 16/set/2022
To cite this article: YENKIKAR, Anuradha; BABU, Narendra; HEMANTH, Jude. SENTINET: A DEEP SENTIMENT ANALYSIS NETWORK FOR POLITICAL MEDIA BIAS DETECTION. DYNA November –
December 2022. vol.97, n.6 , pp. 645-651. DOI: https://doi.org/10.6036/10593
the lowest press freedom rankings for democracies. Media bias
RESUMEN plays an influencing role even at the voting booth as propaganda
can skew voter decisions and perceptions of what is true in this
• L a India es el país con mayor tirada de periódicos del
era of fake news. It’s vital to keep an eye on bias in the news and
mundo, pero desgraciadamente también tiene altos índices
de parcialidad en los medios de comunicación y una de to provide a platform where people can get unbiased and relia-
las clasificaciones de libertad de prensa más bajas de las ble news. Researchers in sentiment analysis and bias detection
democracias. La parcialidad de los medios de comunicación have been using various techniques to achieve higher accuracy.
influye incluso en las urnas, ya que la propaganda puede This study aims Indian political media bias detection by propo-
sesgar las decisiones de los votantes y su percepción de lo sing SentiNet - a graphical processing unit (GPU) trained modified
que es cierto en esta era de noticias falsas. Es vital vigilar
convolution neural network (CNN) model consisting of linearly in-
la parcialidad de las noticias y proporcionar una plataforma
verted depth-wise separable convolutions capable of classifying
en la que la gente pueda obtener noticias imparciales y
news as either ‘unbiased’ or ‘biased’ from Twitter data. Because
fiables. Los investigadores del análisis de sentimientos y la
of its simple architecture and lesser number of tuning parameters,
detección de sesgos han utilizado diversas técnicas para lograr
una mayor precisión. Este estudio tiene como objetivo la it is observed that SentiNet is a good fit in terms of accuracy and
detección de sesgos en los medios de comunicación políticos loss function and its training time reduces by 50% when using a
indios proponiendo SentiNet, un modelo de red neuronal de GPU. Considering top 5 media news houses, from results it is ob-
convolución (CNN) modificado y entrenado por una unidad de served that Channel 1 and Channel 2 emerged as the most biased
procesamiento gráfico (GPU) que consiste en convoluciones towards ruling party and Opposition parties respectively. Channel
separables en profundidad y linealmente invertidas, capaz de
3 and Channel 5 emerged unbiased towards ruling party with ba-
clasificar las noticias como “imparciales” o “sesgadas” a partir
lanced reporting. Channel 4 has emerged as unbiased towards Op-
de los datos de Twitter. Debido a su sencilla arquitectura y
position parties. From Twitter political discourse, it is found that
al menor número de parámetros de ajuste, se observa que
parties discuss themselves or their opposing parties and seldom
SentiNet se ajusta bien en términos de precisión y función de
pérdida y su tiempo de entrenamiento se reduce en un 50% issues of national interest. Apart from governments, the proposed
cuando se utiliza una GPU. Considerando los 5 principales model can be extended to other social media networks and used
medios de comunicación, se observa que el Canal 1 y el Canal by companies to measure customer bias in any product or service.
2 resultaron ser los más sesgados hacia el partido gobernante Key Words: media bias, convolution neural network, graphical
y los partidos de la oposición, respectivamente. El Canal 3 y el processing unit, twitter.
Canal 5 se mostraron imparciales hacia el partido en el poder
con una información equilibrada. El Canal 4 ha resultado
ser imparcial hacia los partidos de la oposición. Del discurso
1. INTRODUCTION
político de Twitter se desprende que los partidos hablan de sí
Opinions play a significant role in decision-making. When
mismos o de los partidos de la oposición y rara vez de temas de
interés nacional. Aparte de los gobiernos, el modelo propuesto choosing a product or service, customers are influenced by the
puede extenderse a otras redes sociales y ser utilizado por opinions of everyone else. People used to rely on the experiences
las empresas para medir el sesgo de los clientes en cualquier of family members and peers to make better decisions. People
producto o servicio. and organizations use social media not just to share content and
• Palabras clave: sesgo mediático, red neuronal de convolución, engage in conversations, but also to express their opinions on a
unidad de procesamiento gráfico, twitter.
variety of products, services, and individuals. It is vital to keep an
eye on bias in the news and to provide a platform where people
can get balanced and reliable news. Facebook and Twitter, for ex-
ABSTRACT ample, give a steady stream of personal viewpoints on a variety of
India has the highest circulation of newspapers in the world, topics. This allows people all across the world to learn about each
but unfortunately it also has high media bias rates and one of other’s experiences. This can help companies to make important
Cod. 10593 | Tecnología de las telecomunicaciones | 3325.99-5 Inteligencia artificial Dyna | Noviembre-Diciembre 2022 | Vol. 97 nº6 | 645-651 | ISSN-L: 0012-7361 | 645nnnnartículo de investigación / research article SENTINET: a deep sentiment analysis network for political media bias detection
Anuradha Yenkikar, C. Narendra Babu and D. Jude Hemanth
business decisions with respect to any product or services. efficient classification model with fewer parameters and
There has been much discussion in recent decades concern- a lightweight design. The model is resilient and adaptable
ing the media’s dependability in reporting news. The Indian media because it can be customized to a wide range of dataset
landscape is vast and heavily populated, with over 100,000 pub- sizes: its block layers can be repeated for depth wise expan-
lications (including 36,000 weekly newspapers) and 380 televi- sion, and the number of filters in the convolutions can be
sion news stations. It swings from Extreme left to Extreme right changed for width wise growth.
based on the political inclination they harbor. This involves the 2) We study the effect of GPU on training the model.
identification of bias in everyday news, as well as the availability 3) We study bias in five Indian English channels towards ruling
of a platform that allows users to get fair and secure news. This party and opposition parties using twitter sentiment data
study uses Twitter, which has grown to become a powerful micro- emanating from these media networks and get insights into
blogging site with 330 million monthly active users as of the last their affiliations.
reported quarter. One of the most visible examples of this impact 4) The model provides insights into common topics discussed
is in the socio-political sector, where social media sources such by various political parties on Twitter.
as Twitter play a significant role in influencing people’s views, at- The remaining part of the paper is laid out as follows. Section
titudes, and sentiments [1]. While the developed world struggles 2 includes the associated work. Section 3 delves into the materials
with political influence via social media, the developing world and methodology used. Part 4 presents the experimental results
does not. In the Western world, where the judiciary, law and or- and discussion, and section 5 is the conclusion.
der, democracy, and free speech are vital, terms like “fake news”,
“post-truth” and “bots” have become major topics of debate.
Concerns about the use of social media for political purposes are 2. RELATED WORK
exacerbated in developing countries, where the democratic infra- Many studies have used twitter data to predict political events
structure is comparatively weak and mass crowds are emotionally in recent years, including electoral prediction [7], political orien-
charged and politically motivated [2]. tation prediction [8], and news source bias [5]. Despite its wide-
The type of news that media outlets report is reflected in their spread popularity, mainstream media frequently fails to uphold
tweets. The open nature and worldwide reach of such news sourc- journalistic ethics and mistakenly patronizes certain viewpoints
es can propagate false or misleading information with an agenda [4]. Furthermore, news sources are known to include political bias
to deceive people and sway their beliefs [3]. It has been proposed in their reporting [9], potentially influencing audience political be-
that bias in social media toward or against a specific entity or liefs and, as a result, voting behaviour. Researchers explored many
ideology might impact the behaviour of a specific group of indi- types of bias. A substantial portion of the study in [10] focuses
viduals, as well as accidentally assist in the fulfilment of a specific on a positive to negative bias spectrum. Authors classified it into
objective [4]. Such prejudice has the potential to influence voting three categories: positive/negative/neutral, positive/negative/oth-
behaviour and foster intolerance and animosity in social and po- er, and positive/negative/other, respectively. [11] utilized a simi-
litical issues [5]. For cultures where social networking platforms lar for/against labelling. Other researchers used terms like Israeli/
like Twitter have the power to impact democracy, monitoring, Palestinian [12] or conservative/liberal to describe their political
tracking, and overcoming bias in the media is critical [6]. Gov- views. Finally, rather than focusing on the syntactic or semantic
ernments use such platforms before or during elections to gauge level, and [13] investigated bias selection. Unsupervised methods
voter bias towards any specific party. Authors have for long used to assess three types of media biases: selection bias, coverage bias,
conventional Machine Learning models for sentiment analysis, in- and statement bias were introduced in [5]. They evaluated data
cluding ensemble models. Off late a lot of researchers have used from various foreign news outlets over the course of two weeks
Deep Learning for this task. In this study, we propose a robust GPU and discovered that biases are visible and depend on geographic
trained system for gauging sentiments on political themes [4]. This borders. Similarly, many studies have quantified media bias, but
study examines the tweets of five leading media house networks most of them [9] focus on US-centric news outlets. These studies
in India. It analyses and categorizes news as either ‘Unbiased’ or are limited to analysing media bias toward two political ideologies
‘Biased,’ and then distributes it to a network of individuals who (liberal and conservative) in the United States, and it cannot be
follow/consume it via social media. Deep learning has long failed generalized to more varied multi-party contexts such as in India.
to meet the demand for effective classification models with fewer The goal of study [6] is to provide a metric for comparing media
parameters, lightweight design, and consistent performance, even outlets’ ideological viewpoints to political actors and determining
though most recently published research uses convolution neural if a news organization is left or right centric. However, the author
networks (CNN) for this job. The enormous number of parameters is more concerned in defining centrist from a US perspective than
in deep models of regular convolutions needs a lot of computation from a global perspective. The ideological scores for various major
and infrastructure. Furthermore, situations such as fitting need media outlets are used to calculate media bias. They did this by
additional data or deeper layers, all of which increase the com- counting how many times a certain media outlet quoted specific
putational complexity beyond the capabilities of a standard CPU, think tanks and policy groups, then comparing that to how many
necessitating the use of a GPU to reduce network training. As a times members of Congress cited the same organisations. [14]
result, when using ordinary CNN, there is always a trade-off be- describes a method for determining media bias in story cover-
tween computational cost, model complexity, time and accuracy, age. The study’s conclusions appear to be accurate and consistent
all of which are unrelated. To solve this challenge at hand, newer with public perceptions of the media, including both the outlets
CNN architectures are required. in question and the industry as a whole. In the absence of a well-
Therefore, the key contributions and novelty of this work can defined, standardized, and peer-reviewed approach for measuring
be summarized as: media bias, it’s critical to evaluate the model’s performance as a
1) Designed and implemented a GPU-based optimized Sen- single case study. Indeed, considerable work need to be done be-
tiNet model using CNN for detecting media bias. It is an fore a valid method of measuring media bias can be established.
646 | ISSN-L: 0012-7361 | 645-651 | Vol. 97 nº6 | Noviembre-Diciembre 2022 | Dyna Cod. 10593 | Tecnología de las telecomunicaciones | 3325.99-5 Inteligencia artificialSENTINET: a deep sentiment analysis network for political media bias detection artículo de investigación / research articlennnn
Anuradha Yenkikar, C. Narendra Babu and D. Jude Hemanth
While researching the most important news sources, the newspa- the keywords representatively without actually calling out specific
pers that would furnish the data set were discovered. Six news- political party/leader names so as to focus on the
papers were chosen by the author: USA Today, The New York Post, RulingParty = [“w”, “x”, ”y”, ......., ”z”]
The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Daily News and The OppositionParty = [“a”, ”b”, “c”, .......,”f”]
Los Angeles Times. The next stage is to determine the study’s time Approximately, the dataset contains 1.6 million data points.
frame. The news stories were sourced from chosen newspapers us- For every channel, two .csv files will be downloaded, one for rul-
ing the RIT Library database. Then each outlet’s news stories might ing party (.csv file – ruling party tweets) and other for opposition
be ordered chronologically. The next stage is to figure out which party (.csv file-opposition party tweets). Ruling party files contain
of the stories from the previous step are appropriate for the study. all tweets released by news channel with keywords mentioned in
They obtain dataset by following the aforesaid methods. Following ‘RulingParty’ list and opposition party file contains all tweets re-
the preparation of the data set, a clustering technique such as the leased by news channels with keywords mentioned in ‘Opposition-
k-means clustering algorithm was used. Party’ list. A Python script to download tweets from different news
Algorithms in [15] provides an overview of several keyways for channels is shown in Figure 1.
identifying the sources of media bias and what to do about it in
their study. As Internet users become more reliant on social me-
dia sites like Facebook and Twitter for news, they are confronted
with an overwhelming quantity of news media options. For media
watchdog organizations that rely on content analysis, determin-
ing the bias of these media pages offers a significant challenge. In
[16] proposed a scalable system for properly inferring the biases of
hundreds of news sources on social media sites like Facebook and
Twitter. The main goal is to use their advertiser interfaces, which
provide precise information on the demographics of the news
source’s social media readership. Furthermore, the authors show Figure 1: Algorithm for downloading tweets
how audience attributes, such as ethnicity, gender, age, national-
ity, and income, can be leveraged to infer finer-grained source
biases. 3.2. PRE-PROCESSING
The authors in [17] discuss identifying and analysing media bias Tweet text may contain special symbols, hashtags, numbers,
in news articles. As a result of media bias, or slanted news cover- punctuations and URLs. It must be filtered before it is input to the
age, the public’s perception of specific topics can be significantly model. Python RegEx regular expression package is used to filter
influenced. In computer science, on the other hand, rapid, auto- these impurities.
mated, and scalable ways are available, but few methodologies Next step is to apply NLP operations like tokenization, removal
adequately analyse media bias. Despite their greater technological of stopwords, lemmatization etc. Finally, this processed data needs
capabilities, computer science models for investigating media bias to be converted into numerical vectors using different techniques
are often simpler than those employed in the social sciences, and like BoW, TF-IDF, word2vec, Glove etc. In this study, we chose
they don’t necessarily address the most serious substantive issues. word2vec and Glove as BoW and TF-IDF don’t preserve semantics
By projecting advances in the social sciences to a framework that of the sentence. For w2v embedding we use existing pre-trained
can be targeted by computer science approaches, the proposed Google’s model with 300 dimensions. Similarly, Glove also con-
article builds a shared conceptual understanding. [17]. News Bird verts word into vector where semantically correlated words are
is currently investigating alternative perspectives on international close in vector space.
news. Our goal is to provide observations into biased media and Next, we create text to wordIndex using keras tokenizer ().
news interpretation and, as a result, allows people to make their For every sentence/tweet we create wordIndex values for word. To
own decisions about the potential bias. Various studies are exam- make it of uniform size we perform padding. So, all input sizes are
ining social media content to investigate India’s political scene, now of 30 sizes as shown in example below.
particularly in the context of general elections. [18] examines the Example: [0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 43 1 900]
impact of changing political traditions before the 2014 Indian
general election using tweets from the official accounts of the 3.3. CNN ARCHITECTURE
top ten political parties over a two-month period. [19] presents a One of the main goals of this study is to propose an effective
sentiment analysis of tweets for predicting the 2016 general state classification model for categorizing media bias as ‘unbiased’ or
elections. The authors analysed two months of data to determine ‘biased’ using a large Twitter dataset. From literature [20], it is
how people felt about five political parties. found that with usage of ordinary CNN there is always a com-
promise owing to computational complexity, model complexity or
accuracy which are not connected. To solve the problem, other
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS CNN designs are required. Using the best features of various avail-
able models, a GPU-accelerated Depthwise Separable Convolu-
3.1. DATASET tions (DSC) network is proposed that efficiently uses its param-
Top five (05) English news channels from India are consid- eters, the parallel processing capability of a GPU, maintains maxi-
ered (mentioned representatively) in this work, namely Channel 1, mum accuracy, while keeping the model architecture simple and
Channel 2, Channel 3, Channel 4 and Channel 5. The tweets ema- straight forward. The suggested design is schematically similar to
nating from these news channels are collected over a month. For MobileNetV2 in terms of inverted DSC, usage of the PReLU func-
each channel we download tweets by specifying keywords related tion for non-linearity activation, and the concept of layer block
to Ruling party and Opposition party. Here, we have mentioned progression. The number of parameters and computations utilized
Cod. 10593 | Tecnología de las telecomunicaciones | 3325.99-5 Inteligencia artificial Dyna | Noviembre-Diciembre 2022 | Vol. 97 nº6 | 645-651 | ISSN-L: 0012-7361 | 647nnnnartículo de investigación / research article SENTINET: a deep sentiment analysis network for political media bias detection
Anuradha Yenkikar, C. Narendra Babu and D. Jude Hemanth
in convolutional procedures are dramatically reduced when DSC to 1, and a dropout layer with 50% removal during training. The
is applied. Table I contains a detailed description of the SentiNet model is completed by a fully linked layer with a Softmax and a
model specs, and Figure 2 depicts the entire flow diagram. In- classification layer. All convolution layers are bagged with a batch
verted DSCs with residuals are used in the proposed architecture. normalization layer, but it is not stated in the figures or the table.
Two typical separable full 3x3 convolutions are utilized at first, The feature extraction basis of the network is made up of 40 con-
with 32 and 64 stride 2 filters. These layers are stacked with four volutional layers divided into 14 modules, all of which have linear
DSC Modules, which are feature extractors with an expansion fac- connections, except for the first and last modules of the network
tor of 8 applied to the input tensor. Each module/block has three and the third module of each row.
DSC segments, with the first two having residual connections and The overall flow chart of the proposed methodology is shown
the third having a linear built. A point-wise convolution, a depth- in Figure 3.
wise convolution [48], and a PReLU [20] are factorized for each As dataset is in text format and problem definition is media
segment layer. Except at the final DSC module, down sampling is bias detection, which is a sub-set of sentiment analysis, sequence
handled with a stride of 2 in the last part of the block. The design models are the best choice in Deep Learning. We must decide
is completed with a final 1x1 convolution layer with 1024 filters, whether the text sentiment is positive or negative, and sequence
a global average pooling layer that reduces the spatial resolution information is critical, thus we use the DSC model. Furthermore,
Figure 2: Architecture of SentiNet, a DSC-based classification model for media bias detection
Layer Channel
Input size Kernel size Stride the model is durable and versatile since it can be customized to a
operation count
variety of model sizes - its block layers can be repeated for depth
Image 299 x 299 x 3 - - -
wise expansion, and the number of filters in the convolutions can
Convolution 1 150 x 150 x 32 3 x 3 32 2 be changed for width wise growth. This is important as some
Convolution 2 75 x 75 x 64 3 x 3 64 2 times meaning of current word depends on next word and we
DSC Module 1 75 x 75 x 192 1 x 1, 3 x 3 192 1/1/2 need both the depth and width wise extensions. The complete 1.6
million data points for training the model is used.
DSC Module 2 38 x 38 x 256 1 x 1, 3 x 3 256 1/1/2
DSC Module 3 19 x 19 x 512 1 x 1, 3 x 3 512 1/1/2
3.4. BIAS MEASUREMENT
DSC Module 4 10 x 10 x 768 1 x 1, 3 x 3 768 1/1/2
When more favorable statements are utilized for a certain po-
Convolution 3 10 x 10 x 1024 1 x 1 1024 1 litical party or entity at the expense of others, there is bias in
GAvg Pool 1 x 1 x 1024 10 x 10 1024 - tweets. We use sentiments to investigate biases in tweets. Using
TextBlob’s sentiment analyzer, we calculated sentiment scores in
FC - - K -
two dimensions (positive, biased, and negative, unbiased). It as-
Note: (a) Each line describes the sequence of layers, (b) DSC Module 1 - 4
refers to the structure as in Figure 2, (c) The kernel size 1 x 1, 3 x 3 means signs a sentiment score s between 1.0 and 1.0, with a value close
t
point-wise convolution shadowed with depth-wise convolution, (d) The to these numbers indicating that the content has more negative
stride 1 / 1 / 2 relates to stride of 2 at 3rd convolution module of each block. and positive sentiment, respectively. Assume that s is the senti-
t
Table I: SentiNet parameters ment score for a tweet t, and that we want to classify s into
t
648 | ISSN-L: 0012-7361 | 645-651 | Vol. 97 nº6 | Noviembre-Diciembre 2022 | Dyna Cod. 10593 | Tecnología de las telecomunicaciones | 3325.99-5 Inteligencia artificialSENTINET: a deep sentiment analysis network for political media bias detection artículo de investigación / research articlennnn
Anuradha Yenkikar, C. Narendra Babu and D. Jude Hemanth
TensorFlow, Keras, OpenCV, and SciKit-learn are used to
implement the CNN model in Python 3.8. On the hardware
side, we used Google Collab and an Nvidia K40 GPU instance
to train.
3.4. IMPLEMENTATION
SentiNet model Training, data pre-processing of test data,
classification based on knowledge learnt, and final bias prediction
are the four stages of the proposed model implementation which
are explained in brief below. Figure 4 illustrates the implementa-
tion of the SentiNet classification model. And the pseudocode for
SentiNet classification (train, validate, test) is shown in Figure 5.
· Training: The hidden parameters for training are initialized
in this segment. The execution environment, mini batch size,
initial learning rate, momentum, epoch, and an optimizer are
all conventional settings. The model is trained on both a CPU
and a GPU machine here. Among other combinations, a mini-
batch size of 35 worked nicely. The starting learning rate is set
to 0.01, the maximum epoch to 50, and the optimizer is sto-
chastic gradient descent with momentum (SGDM). Every ten
epoch, the default learning rate drops. Along with the training
options shown in Figure 4, the filters are also subjected to a
momentum of 0.9 with shuffle at each epoch and L2 regular-
ization. The SGDM modifies the network parameters (weights
and biases) to minimize the loss function by taking incremental
steps in the direction of the loss function’s negative gradient.
The inclusion of momentum helps to reduce oscillations that
may occur along the sharpest descending path to the optimum.
The stochastic gradient descent with momentum algorithm
utilizes a single learning rate for all parameters. The following
Figure 3: Flow-chart of overall methodology is the algorithm’s description:
(2)
one of the two sentiment types, positive or negative, by using the
interval given in Eq. 1, where S is the classified sentiment type. where, n signifies the number of iterative training steps, is
t
the learning rate, the vector of qualifying parameters, E( ) de-
(1) notes the loss function and is the momentum factor indicating
how much the previous iteration step affects the current iteration
step.
Figure 4: SentiNet implementation model architecture
Cod. 10593 | Tecnología de las telecomunicaciones | 3325.99-5 Inteligencia artificial Dyna | Noviembre-Diciembre 2022 | Vol. 97 nº6 | 645-651 | ISSN-L: 0012-7361 | 649nnnnartículo de investigación / research article SENTINET: a deep sentiment analysis network for political media bias detection
Anuradha Yenkikar, C. Narendra Babu and D. Jude Hemanth
· Data pre-processing: The dataset is randomized and ran- 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
domly split into train, test, and validate sets in proportions of Training of the SentiNet network is done using the 1.6M data
75%, 10%, and 15% respective. points dataset curated which is split into 75% for training, 15%
· Classification: The training is done with the DNN model, on validation and 10% on testing. The training was done for up
with hyper parameter values changed from the training data- to 9 epochs. It is observed that the model takes a lot of time on
set’s training choices. The training is done with the validation CPU (1123 mins 25 secs) for training. Using a GPU, the network
dataset after each epoch. Following the iterations, the network takes less than half the time (535 mins 3 secs) for training. This is
is used to categorize the test data to make final bias predic- on account of many-core GPU architecture which accelerates the
tions. computational pats of the training and the fact that the proposed
model architecture is simple with fewer parameters to modify.
The model accuracy and loss graphs are shown in Figure 6. The
training score curve and the cross-validation score curve converge
as the size of the training set grows, as shown in the model ac-
curacy graph. As more training data is added, the cross-validation
accuracy improves. As seen from the model loss graph, model is a
good fit as the validation loss decreases to a point of stability. The
‘generalization gap’ between the two is also good.
From media bias results for ruling party as illustrated in Figure
7(a), it is observed that Channel 1 is most pro-ruling party with
70% positive tweets and only 30% against it, followed by Channel
4 with 56% positive tweets and only 44% against it. Channel 2
with 44% positive tweets and 56% against it has emerged anti-
ruling party among all the media channels. Channel 3 and Channel
5 came across as neutral with balanced reporting.
From media bias results for Opposition parties as illustrated in
Figure 7(b), it is observed that Channel 2 is most pro-Opposition
parties with 54% positive tweets and only 44% against it, fol-
lowed very closely by Channel 3 with 53% positive tweets and
Figure 5: Pseudocode for SentiNet classification
only 47% against it. Channel 4 with 49% positive tweets and only
51% against it has emerged neutral, whereas Channel 1 and Chan-
nel 5 with 44%, 41%
positive and 56%,
59% negative tweets
respectively have
emerged as anti-op-
position parties among
the other media chan-
nels.
We can also create
word clouds from the
top 50 phrases associ-
ated with each topic
learned by the Senti-
Net model to observe
Figure 6: Accuracy and Loss functions for Media Bias classification using SentiNet topics under discus-
sion. It can be used to
show how incumbents
Figure 7: Media bias results using SentiNet
650 | ISSN-L: 0012-7361 | 645-651 | Vol. 97 nº6 | Noviembre-Diciembre 2022 | Dyna Cod. 10593 | Tecnología de las telecomunicaciones | 3325.99-5 Inteligencia artificialSENTINET: a deep sentiment analysis network for political media bias detection artículo de investigación / research articlennnn
Anuradha Yenkikar, C. Narendra Babu and D. Jude Hemanth
(any current government) and opposition parties use Twitter for lens of mainstream and alternative news sources,” in Proceedings of the
2017 Internet Measurement Conference. ACM, pp. 405–417, 2017.
political communication. The terms with bigger font size have
[4] S. Zafar, U. Sarwar, Z. Gilani, and J. Qadir, “Sentiment analysis of
a higher frequency of use and relevance. We can discover what
controversial topics on pakistan’s twitter user-base,” in Proceedings of the
are the most frequent mentions by say some politicians and how 7th Annual Symposium on Computing for Development, ser. ACM DEV ’16.
close/far are they from issues of national interest. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 35:1–35:4,2016. [Online]. Available:
Disclaimer: The research work carried out is purely from the http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3001913.3006644
[5] D. Saez-Trumper, C. Castillo, and M. Lalmas, “Social media news
perspective of using Deep Learning techniques to solve Sentiment
communities: gatekeeping, coverage, and statement bias,” in Proceedings
Analysis problems of this nature and scale. It is not for politi-
of the 22nd ACM international conference on Conference on information
cal criticism citing any specific media, political party or individu- & knowledge management. ACM, pp. 1679–1684, 2013.
als. The article purely focusses on the scientific methodology for [6] G. B. Leichty, M. U. D’Silva, and M. R. Johns, “Twitter and aam aadmi party:
checking Media Bias and can be adopted for various other appli- Collective representations of a social movement turned political party.”
Intercultural Communication Studies, vol. 25, no. 2, 2016.
cation domains too.
[7] P. Burnap, R. Gibson, L. Sloan, R. Southern, and M. Williams, “140 characters
to victory?: Using twitter to predict the uk 2015 general election,” Electoral
Studies, vol. 41, pp. 230–233, 2016.
5. CONCLUSION [8] M. D. Conover, B. Gonc¸alves, J. Ratkiewicz, A. Flammini, and F. Menczer,
The media can shape public opinion, which in turn shapes and “Predicting the political alignment of twitter users,” in Privacy, Security,
Risk and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011 IEEE Third Inernational Conference on
influences people’s daily lives. It plays an influencing role even at
Social Computing (SocialCom), IEEE Third International Conference on.
the voting booth as propaganda can skew voter decisions and per-
IEEE, pp. 192–199, 2011.
ceptions of what is true in this era of fake news. Therefore, track- [9] A. Younus, M. A. Qureshi, S. K. Kingrani, M. Saeed, N. Touheed, C. O’Riordan,
ing bias in everyday news and building a platform where people and P. Gabriella, “Investigating bias in traditional media through social
can receive neutral and unequivocal news information is impor- media,” in Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on World Wide
Web. ACM, pp. 643–644, 2012.
tant. Various Machine learning and deep learning techniques have
[10] S. Park, K. Lee, and J. Song, “Contrasting opposing views of news articles
been used by researchers in the past. It is found that in usage of
on contentious issues,” in Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
ordinary CNN there is always a compromise owing to computa- of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
tional complexity, model complexity or accuracy which are not Technologies - Volume 1, ser. HLT ’11. Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association
connected. In this study, we design and implement a GPU-based, for Computational Linguistics, 2011, pp. 340–349. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2002472.2002516
DSC optimized CNN model on large scale twitter political data
[11] S. Somasundaran and J. Wiebe, “Recognizing stances in ideological on-
from five media houses. It is observed that the model is durable
line debates,” in Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on
and versatile since it can be customized to a variety of model Computational Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text,
sizes - its block layers can be repeated for depth wise expansion, ser. CAAGET ’10. Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational
and the number of filters in the convolutions can be changed for Linguistics, pp. 116–124, 2010. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=1860631.1860645
width wise growth. This is important as some times meaning of
[12] A. Ahmed and E. P. Xing, “Staying informed: Supervised and semi
current word depends on next word and we need both the depth
supervised multi-view topical analysis of ideological perspective,” in
and width wise extensions. From results, the GPU helps in reduc- Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
ing the training computational complexity by half. The model is Language Processing, ser. EMNLP ’10. Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association
a good fit in terms of accuracy with validation loss decreasing for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1140–1150, 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1870658.1870769
to a point of stability. In terms of media houses, Channel 1 and
[13] V. Niculae, C. Suen, J. Zhang, C. Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and J. Leskovec,
Channel 2 emerged as the most biased towards ruling party and
“Quotus: The structure of political media coverage as revealed by quoting
Opposition parties respectively. Channel 3 and Channel 5 emerged patterns,” in Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World
unbiased towards ruling party with balanced reporting. Channel 4 Wide Web, ser. WWW ’15. Republic and Canton of Geneva, Switzerland:
has emerged as unbiased towards Opposition parties. From twit- International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, pp. 798–
808, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2736277.2741688
ter political discourse, it is found that parties discuss themselves
[14] Dev Sheth, “Measuring Ideological Bias in News Coverage of Political
or their opposing parties and seldom issues of national interest.
Events by Print Media using Data Analytics”, Capstone Project, 2016.
Apart for use by governments to find out electoral prediction, po- [15] Richard Alan Nelson, “Tracking propaganda to the source: tools for
litical orientation prediction, and news source bias [5]., the model analyzing media bias”, European Journal of Social Sciences Studies, [S.l.],
can be extended for use by businesses to check customer bias for 2019.
[16] Filipe N. Ribeiro, Lucas Henrique, Fabrício Benevenuto, Abhijnan
their products and services. As part of future research, the pro-
Chakraborty, Juhi Kulshrestha, Mahmoudreza Babaei, Krishna Gummadi,
posed model will be extended to other social media networks for
“Media Bias Monitor: Quantifying Biases of Social Media News Outlets at
monitoring and to explore other application domains like brand Large-Scale”, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
monitoring and reputation management, customer support ticket (www.aaai.org), 2018.
analysis, consumer marketing behaviour and workplace bias man- [17] Felix Hamborg, Karsten Donnay, Bela Gipp, “Automated identification
of media bias in news articles: an interdisciplinary literature review”,
agement.
International Journal on Digital Libraries, 2018.
[18] K. Jaidka and S. Ahmed, “The 2014 indian general election on twitter: An
analysis of changing political traditions,” in Proceedings of the Seventh
REFERENCES International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies
[1] N. Eltantawy and J. B. Wiest, “The arab spring social media in the egyptian and Development. ACM, 2015, p. 43.
revolution: reconsidering resource mobilization theory,” International [19] P. Sharma and T.-S. Moh, “Prediction of indian election using sentiment
Journal of Communication, vol. 5, p. 18, 2011. analysis on hindi twitter,” in Big Data (Big Data), 2016 IEEE International
[2] M. Lynch, D. Freelon, and S. Aday, “Syrias socially mediated civil war,” Conference on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 1966–1971.
United States Institute of Peace, vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 1–35, 2014. [20] Bianco, S.; Cadene, R.; Celona, L.; Napoletano, P. “Benchmark analysis of
[3] S. Zannettou, T. Caulfield, E. De Cristofaro, N. Kourtelris, I. Leontiadis, representative deep neural network architectures”, IEEE Access, 6: 64270-
M. Sirivianos, G. Stringhini, and J. Blackburn, “The web centipede: 64277, 2018.
understanding how web communities influence each other through the
Cod. 10593 | Tecnología de las telecomunicaciones | 3325.99-5 Inteligencia artificial Dyna | Noviembre-Diciembre 2022 | Vol. 97 nº6 | 645-651 | ISSN-L: 0012-7361 | 651